*************** Preamble ***************

--- Preamble ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/b408ed30f42c)

The Parties to this Agreement, resolving to:

ESTABLISH a comprehensive regional agreement that promotes economic integration to liberalise trade and investment, bring economic growth and social benefits, create new opportunities for workers and businesses, contribute to raising living standards, benefit consumers, reduce poverty and promote sustainable growth;

STRENGTHEN the bonds of friendship and cooperation between them and their peoples;

BUILD on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization;

RECOGNISE the differences in their levels of development and diversity of economies;

STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their businesses in global markets and enhance the competitiveness of their economies by promoting opportunities for businesses, including promoting the development and strengthening of regional supply chains;

SUPPORT the growth and development of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises by enhancing their ability to participate in and benefit from the opportunities created by this Agreement;

ESTABLISH a predictable legal and commercial framework for trade and investment through mutually advantageous rules;

FACILITATE regional trade by promoting efficient and transparent customs procedures that reduce costs and ensure predictability for their importers and exporters;

RECOGNISE their inherent right to regulate and resolve to preserve the flexibility of the Parties to set legislative and regulatory priorities, safeguard public welfare, and protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as public health, safety, the environment, the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources, the integrity and stability of the financial system and public morals;

RECOGNISE further their inherent right to adopt, maintain or modify health care systems;

AFFIRM that state-owned enterprises can play a legitimate role in the diverse economies of the Parties, while recognising that the provision of unfair advantages to state-owned enterprises undermines fair and open trade and investment, and resolve to establish rules for state-owned enterprises that promote a level playing field with privately owned businesses, transparency and sound business practices;

PROMOTE high levels of environmental protection, including through effective enforcement of environmental laws, and further the aims of sustainable development, including through mutually supportive trade and environmental policies and practices;

PROTECT and enforce labour rights, improve working conditions and living standards, strengthen cooperation and the Parties’ capacity on labour issues;

PROMOTE transparency, good governance and rule of law, and eliminate bribery and corruption in trade and investment;

RECOGNISE the important work that our relevant authorities are doing to strengthen macroeconomic cooperation, including on exchange rate issues, in appropriate fora;

RECOGNISE the importance of cultural identity and diversity among and within the Parties, and that trade and investment can expand opportunities to enrich cultural identity and diversity at home and abroad;

CONTRIBUTE to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade and provide a catalyst to broader regional and international cooperation;

ESTABLISH an Agreement to address future trade and investment challenges and opportunities, and contribute to advancing their respective priorities over time; and

EXPAND their partnership by encouraging the accession of other States or separate customs territories in order to further enhance regional economic integration and create the foundation of a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

Next Chapter: Initial Provisions and General Definitions


*************** Chapter 1 ***************

--- Initial Provisions and General Definitions ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/aec6d5031f1b)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

This chapter organizes and provides overall structure for the TPP Agreement; sets out the relationship between the TPP Agreement and other agreements already in place among the TPP Parties (in particular the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement, but also existing free trade agreements among the TPP Parties); and defines technical terms used in more than one chapter of the Agreement.

Overview

Relation to Other Agreements

The TPP Parties have obligations to each other under other agreements, such as the WTO Agreement. This chapter affirms that these other agreements remain in place. In addition, although we have been careful to ensure that TPP does not create any obligations that would be inconsistent with any of our existing agreements (including the WTO Agreement), a TPP Party may request consultations with another Party if it believes there is an inconsistency. In many cases, TPP will broaden or improve upon commitments in existing agreements. For example, the commitments Mexico, Canada, Chile, Singapore, Australia, and Peru have made in TPP’s Labor and Environment chapters broaden and improve upon NAFTA and previous FTAs. Regardless of the agreements, TPP Parties will be obligated to implement TPP’s more ambitious standards.

General Definitions

The chapter provides definitions of terms that are used in more than one chapter of the Agreement. Specific chapters also provide definitions of terms that are only used in those chapters.

Section A: Initial Provisions

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties to this Agreement, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS, hereby establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

Article 1.2: Relation to Other Agreements

1. Recognizing the Parties’ intention for this Agreement to coexist with their existing international agreements, each Party affirms,

(a) in relation to existing international agreements to which all Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement, its existing rights and obligations with respect to each other; and

(b) in relation to existing international agreements to which that Party and at least one other Party are party, its existing rights and obligations with respect to such other Party or Parties, as the case may be.

2. If a Party believes that a provision of this Agreement is inconsistent with a provision of another agreement to which it and at least one other Party are party, upon request, the relevant Parties to the other agreement shall consult with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution. This paragraph is without prejudice to a Party’s rights and obligations under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement).[1]

Section B: General Definitions

Article 1.3: General Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

AD Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

Agreement means the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement;

APEC means Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation;

central level of government has for each Party the meaning set out at Annex 1-A (Party-Specific Definitions).

Commission means the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission established under Article 27.1 (Establishment of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission);

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment in its territory of an investor of another Party in existence as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement or established, acquired, or expanded thereafter;

customs administration means the competent authority that is responsible under the laws of a Party for the administration of customs laws, regulations and, where applicable, policies, and has for each Party the meaning set out at Annex 1-A (Party-Specific Definitions)

customs duty includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed on or in connection with the importation of a good, and any surtax or surcharge imposed in connection with such importation, but does not include any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article III:2 of GATT 1994;

(b) fee or other charge in connection with the importation commensurate with the cost of services rendered; and

(c) antidumping or countervailing duty.

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

days means calendar days;

enterprise means any entity constituted or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, including any corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association, or similar organization;

existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, contained in Annex 1B to the WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

goods of a Party means domestic products as these are understood in GATT 1994 or such goods as the Parties may agree, and includes originating goods of a Party;

government procurement means the process by which a government obtains the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale or use in the production or supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale;

Harmonized System (HS) means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter Notes and Subheading Notes as adopted and implemented by the Parties in their respective laws;

heading means the first four digits in the tariff classification number under the Harmonized System;

measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement, or practice;

national means a natural person who has the nationality of a Party according to Annex 1-A (Party-Specific Definition) or a permanent resident of a Party;

originating means qualifying under the rules of origin set out in Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures) or Chapter 4 (Textiles and Apparel);

Party means any State or separate customs territory for which this Agreement is in force;

person means a natural person or an enterprise;

person of a Party means a national or an enterprise of a Party;

preferential tariff treatment means the customs duty rate applicable to an originating good, pursuant to each Party’s Tariff Elimination Schedule set out in Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination);

recovered material means a material in the form of one or more individual parts that results from:

(a) the disassembly of a used good into individual parts; and

(b) the cleaning, inspecting, testing or other processing of those parts as necessary for improvement to sound working condition;

remanufactured good means a good classified in HS Chapters 84 through 90 or under heading 94.02 except goods classified under HS headings 84.18, 85.09, 85.10, and 85.16, 87.03 or subheadings 8414.51, 8450.11, 8450.12, 8508.11, and 8517.11, that is entirely or partially composed of recovered materials and:

(a) has a similar life expectancy and performs the same as or similar to such a good when new; and

(b) has a factory warranty similar to that applicable to such a good when new;

regional level of government has for each Party the meaning set out at Annex 1-A (Party-Specific Definitions):

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

sanitary or phytosanitary measure means any measure referred to in paragraph 1 of Annex A of the SPS Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

SME means a small and medium-sized enterprise, including a micro-sized enterprise;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

state enterprise means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party;

subheading means the first six digits in the tariff classification number under the Harmonized System;

territory has for each party the meaning set out at Annex 1-A (Party-Specific Definitions);

textile or apparel good means a good listed in Annex 4-A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin);

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, contained in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement;[2]

WTO means the World Trade Organization; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, done on April 15, 1994.

Annex 1-A

Party-Specific Definitions

Further to Article 1.3, for the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

central level of government means:

(a) for Australia, the Commonwealth government;

(b) for Brunei Darussalam, the national level of government;

(c) for Canada, the Government of Canada;

(d) for Chile, the national level of government;

(e) for Japan, the Government of Japan;

(f) for Malaysia, the federal level of government;

(g) for Mexico, the federal level of government;

(h) for New Zealand, the national level of government;

(i) for Peru, the national level of government;

(j) for Singapore, the national level of government;

(k) for the United States, the federal level of government; and

(l) for Viet Nam, the national level of government ;

customs administration means:

(a) in relation to Australia means the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service;

(b) in relation to Brunei Darussalam means the Royal Customs and Excise Department;

(c) in relation to Canada means the Canada Border Services Agency;

(d) in relation to Chile means the National Customs Service of Chile;

(e) in relation to Japan means the Ministry of Finance;

(f) in relation to Malaysia means the Royal Malaysian Customs Department;

(g) in relation to Mexico means The Ministry of Finance and Public Credit;

(h) in relation to New Zealand means the New Zealand Customs Service;

(i) in relation to Peru means the National Superintendence of Customs and Tax Administration;

(j) in relation to Singapore means the Singapore Customs;

(k) in relation to the United States of America means U.S. Customs and Border Protection; and, with respect to provisions that concern enforcement, information sharing and investigations, this also means U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, as applicable; and

(l) in relation to Viet Nam means the General Department of Viet Nam Customs;

or any successor of such customs administration.

natural person who has the nationality of a Party means:

(a) with respect to Australia, a natural person who is an Australian citizen as defined in the Australian Citizenship Act 2007 as amended from time to time, or any successor legislation;

(b) with respect to Brunei Darussalam, a subject of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan in accordance with the laws of Brunei Darussalam;

(c) with respect to Canada, a natural person who is a citizen of Canada under Canadian legislation;

(d) with respect to Chile, a Chilean as defined in Article 10 of the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile;

(e) with respect to Japan, a natural person who has the nationality of Japan under its laws;

(f) with respect to Malaysia, a natural person who is a citizen of Malaysia in accordance with its laws and regulations;

(g) with respect to Mexico, a person who has the nationality of Mexico in accordance with its applicable laws;

(h) with respect to New Zealand, a natural person who is a citizen as defined in the Citizenship Act 1977, as amended from time to time, or any successor legislation;

(i) with respect to Peru, a natural person who has the nationality of Peru by birth, naturalization or option in accordance with the Political Constitution of Peru (Constitución Política del Peru) and other relevant domestic legislation;

(j) with respect to Singapore, any person who is a citizen of Singapore within the meaning of its Constitution and its domestic laws;

(k) with respect to the United States, “national of the United States” as defined in the Immigration and Nationality Act; and

(l) with respect to Viet Nam, any person who is a citizen of Viet Nam within the meaning of its Constitution and its domestic laws;

regional level of government means:

(a) for Australia, means a state of Australia, the Australian Capital Territory, or the Northern Territory;

(b) for Brunei Darussalam, the term regional level of government is not applicable;

(c) for Canada, means a provincial or territorial government;

(d) for Chile, as a unitary Republic, the term regional level of government is not applicable;

(e) for Japan, the term regional level of government is not applicable;

(f) for Malaysia, means a State of the Federation of Malaysia in accordance with the Federal Constitution of Malaysia;

(g) for Mexico, means a state of the United Mexican States;

(h) for New Zealand, the term regional level of government is not applicable;

(i) for Peru, means regional government in accordance with the Political Constitution of Peru (Constitución Política del Perú) and other applicable legislation;

(j) for Singapore, the term regional level of government is not applicable;

(k) for the United States, means a state of the United States, the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico; and

(l) for Viet Nam, the term regional level of government is not applicable; and

territory means:

(a) with respect to Australia, the territory of Australia:

(i) excluding all external territories other than the Territory of Norfolk Island, the Territory of Christmas Island, the Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands, the Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands, the Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands, and the Coral Sea Islands Territory; and

(ii) including Australia’s territorial sea, contiguous zone, exclusive economic zone and continental shelf over which Australia exercises sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with international law;

(b) with respect to Brunei Darussalam, the territory of Brunei Darussalam including its territorial sea, extending to the airspace above such territory, over which it exercises sovereignty, and the maritime area beyond its territorial sea, including sea-bed and subsoil, which has been or may hereafter be designated under the laws of Brunei Darussalam as an area over which it exercises rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law;

(c) with respect to Canada:

(i) the land territory, air space, internal waters and territorial seas of Canada;

(ii) the exclusive economic zone of Canada, as determined by its domestic law, consistent with Part V of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea done at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982 (UNCLOS); and

(iii) the continental shelf of Canada, as determined by its domestic law, consistent with Part VI of UNCLOS;

(d) with respect to Chile, the land, maritime, and air space under its sovereignty, and the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf within which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law and its domestic law;

(e) with respect to Japan, the territory of Japan, and all the area beyond its territorial sea, including the sea-bed and subsoil thereof, over which Japan exercises sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with international law including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the laws and regulations of Japan;

(f) with respect to Malaysia, its land, territory, internal waters and territorial sea, as well as any maritime area situated beyond the territorial sea which has been or might in the future be designated under its national law, in accordance with international law, as an area within which Malaysia may exercise sovereign rights or jurisdiction with regards to the sea, the sea-bed, the subsoil and the natural resources;

(g) with respect to Mexico,

(i) the States of the Federation and the Federal District;

(ii) the islands, including the reefs and keys, in the adjacent seas;

(iii) the islands of Guadalupe and Revillagigedo, situated in the Pacific Ocean;

(iv) the continental shelf and the submarine shelf of such islands, keys and reefs;

(v) the waters of the territorial seas in accordance with international law and its interior maritime waters;

(vi) the space located above the national territory, in accordance with international law; and

(vii) any areas beyond the territorial seas of Mexico within which, in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as may be amended, and its domestic law, Mexico may exercise rights with respect to the seabed and sub-soil and their natural resources;

(h) with respect to New Zealand, the territory of New Zealand and the exclusive economic zone, seabed and subsoil over which it exercises sovereign rights with respect to natural resources in accordance with international law, but does not include Tokelau;

(i) with respect to Peru, the mainland territory, the islands, the maritime areas, and the air space above them, under sovereignty or sovereign rights and jurisdiction of Peru, in accordance with the provisions of the Political Constitution of Peru (Constitución Política del Perú) and other relevant domestic law and international law;

(j) with respect to Singapore, its land territory, internal waters and territorial sea, as well as any maritime area situated beyond the territorial sea which has been or might in the future be designated under its national law, in accordance with international law, as an area within which Singapore may exercise sovereign rights or jurisdiction with regards to the sea, the sea-bed, the subsoil and the natural resources;

(k) with respect to the United States,

(i) the customs territory of the United States, which includes the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico;

(ii) the foreign trade zones located in the United States and Puerto Rico; and

(iii) any areas beyond the territorial seas of the United States within which, in accordance with international law and its domestic law, the United States may exercise sovereign rights with respect to the seabed and subsoil and their natural resources; and

(l) with respect to Viet Nam, the land territory, islands, internal waters, territorial sea, and airspace above them, the maritime areas beyond territorial sea including seabed, subsoil and natural resources thereof over which Viet Nam exercises its sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with its domestic laws and international law.

— — —

[1] For the purpose of application of this Agreement, the Parties agree that the fact that an agreement provides more favorable treatment of goods, services, investments, or persons than that provided for under this Agreement does not mean that there is an inconsistency within the meaning of paragraph

[2] For greater certainty, “TRIPS Agreement” includes any waiver in force between the Parties of any provision of the TRIPS Agreement granted by WTO Members in accordance with the WTO Agreement.


*************** Chapter 2 ***************

--- National Treatment and Market Access for Goods ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/741f0639c2de)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

Through the TPP Agreement, the United States is seeking to create an economic architecture in the Asia-Pacific region that helps American businesses, workers, farmers and ranchers produce and sell their goods more easily. The National Treatment and Market Access for Goods Chapter (also known as the Goods chapter) helps us reach this goal by removing barriers to export of Made-in-America manufactures and farm products. Some TPP countries impose tariffs that translate into very high costs for buyers of American products. For example, Malaysia charges tariffs of 30 percent on American autos, while Brunei has tariffs as high as 20 percent on machinery. Japanese tariffs on leather footwear can rise as high as 189 percent out of quota and 17 percent on fruits and vegetables (or even higher for oranges in season); Vietnam imposes tariffs averaging 9.4 percent on manufactured goods, and those tariffs often rise higher, as high as 27 percent for auto parts and 68 percent for trucks. Vietnam also imposes high rates in agriculture, as high as 30 percent on cuts of pork. These disadvantages are magnified by free trade agreements (FTAs) that do not include the United States. For example, Vietnamese auto parts buyers pay a 27 percent tariff if they choose American parts, but only 5 percent or no tariff at all on similar Chinese- or Thai-made auto parts under the China-ASEAN FTA and the ASEAN Free Trade Area.

Reducing or eliminating these tariffs, and other barriers to American exports, in many fast-growing markets will help support economic growth and high-wage employment for Americans in the 21st century. In so doing, TPP will help secure America’s emerging role as the world’s most attractive site for manufacturing, support higher incomes and rural development, and help to ensure a future of sustained U.S. economic growth based on highwage employment, research, investment, and production.

Overview

Tariffs and core obligations

The Goods chapter includes fundamental obligations for the TPP Parties to eliminate customs duties on qualifying goods from the TPP region, and to provide treatment to the goods of other TPP Parties equivalent to that which they provide their own nationals (“national treatment”). This means elimination of all tariffs on American manufactured goods and nearly all farm products. The majority of the tariff elimination will be immediate, although some tariffs will be eliminated over agreed timeframes. In agriculture specifically, TPP will eliminate tariffs on almost all U.S. exports of food and agricultural products, and for the remaining products will provide new and commercially meaningful market access and increased export opportunities through significant tariff reductions or changes to tariff rate quotas.

Import and export restrictions

To ensure that countries do not maintain or expand other discriminatory trade barriers at the same time that they are eliminating tariffs or invent new barriers to circumvent TPP’s obligations, the Goods chapter incorporates the broad World Trade Organization (WTO) obligations regarding import and export restrictions into TPP as the fundamental framework for trade in goods between the Parties. In addition, the Goods chapter prohibits import licensing conditioned on performance requirements, as well as prohibiting requirements that exporters establish contractual relationships with domestic distributors as a condition of importation. For example, an exporter of U.S.-made farm equipment cannot be required by law in a TPP Party to use a local distributor to import its product into a TPP country.

Performance requirements

Performance requirements impose obligations on companies, such as requiring that a certain level of goods or services be exported or that domestic goods and/or services be used in order to obtain preferential treatment for their imports. These requirements are used by some countries to unfairly discourage the use of imports even as tariffs are reduced. The Goods chapter prohibits Parties from using performance requirements as a condition of qualifying for reduced tariffs.

Import licensing

Complicated and unclear import licensing procedures can create costs and obstacles for exporters and can result in significant barriers to trade. The Goods chapter includes requirements for Parties to notify each other of their import licensing procedures, including any conditions and eligibility requirements, and to regularly update these notifications. In addition, Parties cannot apply import licensing procedures to TPP goods without notifying all Parties of the license requirement and the reason for it.

Special regimes

The Goods chapter requires Parties to provide duty-free treatment for repairs and alterations; the temporary admission of goods like professional equipment, commercial samples, goods for display and demonstration, and sports equipment; and commercial samples of negligible value and printed advertising material. Duty-free treatment for these types of imports lowers costs for commercial activity within the TPP region, including for professional services that require ancillary goods.

Publication

To ensure that traders understand the rules they will be required to follow in trading with each TPP Party, the Goods chapter includes a requirement that Parties publish all information related to import and export procedures and requirements, tariff rates, taxes and fees related to importation, tariff quotas, and import and export restrictions.

Agricultural export subsidies

The Goods chapter contains a commitment by all TPP Parties to eliminate agricultural export subsidies — which are considered among the most trade-distorting agricultural trade measures — on goods sold in TPP markets. The United States — which does not use agricultural export subsidies — has long sought to eliminate the use of such subsidies at the multilateral level. TPP also supports the groundwork for global agricultural trade reform on export subsidies in the WTO.

Export credits in agriculture

The Parties agree to work together in the WTO to develop multilateral disciplines on export credits, export credit guarantees and insurance programs. This commitment reflects the ongoing work of the United States and other TPP partners on agricultural trade reform in the multilateral arena.

Export restrictions in agriculture

The Goods chapter limits export restrictions on foodstuffs to six months, requires notification of other TPP Parties in advance when a country imposes such restrictions, and mandates consultation with interested TPP importing countries if the restriction remains in place more than 12 months. This provision is intended to discourage countries from imposing export restrictions on food and agricultural products as a means of protecting their domestic market from changes in the world market. When countries do so with respect to staple food products like rice and wheat, poor countries relying on the international market to import food supplies can suffer immediate and sharp crises in access to food. TPP’s commitment in this area will help improve the stability of regional farm markets in general, and provide additional food security to lower-income countries in the region such as Cambodia, Papua New Guinea, Bangladesh and others.

State trading enterprises

Some countries have state trading enterprises that control exports of specific products. Through the Goods chapter, TPP partners have agreed to work together in the WTO to improve transparency around the operations of agricultural export state trading enterprises, and have agreed on rules preventing these enterprises from receiving special governmental financing or trade-distorting restrictions on exports.

Modern agricultural biotechnology

Products derived from agricultural biotechnology are grown in 28 countries and are traded widely. TPP includes commitments to provide transparency on government measures on biotechnology trade. It also provides for information sharing, and procedures for Parties to follow when the low-level presence of biotech material is detected in a shipment of agricultural commodities or food products.

New Features

TPP’s Goods chapter includes new commitments that address emerging industries and certain non-tariff barriers that U.S. companies face in foreign markets, breaking new ground in U.S. trade agreements. These new features include:

Remanufactured goods

Remanufacturing is an important and growing sector in the United States. Remanufactured goods — that is, products not simply repaired but restored to ‘like new’ condition — are cost-effective, support skilled jobs in the United States and other TPP countries, and offer environmental benefits through efficient reuse of existing parts and resources. The United States is the largest remanufacturer in the world, with at least $43 billion in production and $11 billion in exports, supporting an estimated 180,000 American jobs. However, many countries have import restrictions on used goods, which they inappropriately apply to remanufactured goods, restricting market access for U.S. exporters. TPP specifies that Parties cannot apply restrictions on the importation of used goods to remanufactured goods, but they can require that remanufactured goods meet all technical requirements for equivalent new goods and/or be identified as remanufactured for sale or distribution.

Export licensing procedures

The lack of transparency in export licensing procedures can be used to limit or restrict exports of key commodities and raw materials, distorting world prices and providing domestic processors in foreign countries with unfair competitive benefits against U.S. processors. TPP’s Goods chapter prevents export licensing procedures from being used as an unfair trade barrier. TPP is the first U.S. FTA to include a provision related to transparency in export licensing procedures, which requires Parties to publish their export licensing procedures, including any conditions and eligibility requirements, as well as references to the measures that the procedures are used to implement. These obligations do not affect the ability of Parties to adopt or maintain export control measures.

Impact

Exports have been a center of strength for the U.S. economy, and TPP will help us sustain and build on this success. The Goods chapter is an essential part of this, removing over 18,000 individual tariffs and other barriers to the export of U.S. goods and farm products.

Since the recent financial crisis, the U.S. economy has rebalanced away from debt-financed, real estate-based growth toward more sustainable sources of growth driven by sectors like investment, research, and production in manufacturing and agriculture. Exports have contributed nearly one third of U.S. economic growth between 2009 and 2014, and our 11 TPP partners in turn have been an important part of this story. Together comprising a market of nearly 500 million people, an economy of over $10 trillion, and three of America’s five largest export markets (Canada, Japan, and Mexico), TPP countries import nearly $3 trillion per year in manufactured goods, farm products, and natural resource products. This includes $639 billion worth of American manufactured goods, representing nearly half of U.S. manufacturing exports, in sectors ranging from autos, satellites, and cosmetics, to semiconductor chips and sports equipment.

TPP partners bought 42 percent of our more than $150 billion in exports of grains, meats, dairy, fruits and vegetables, and other farm goods. 9 American farmers — as the most productive and scientifically advanced globally — can serve the world. Nowhere is the opportunity greater than in the Asia-Pacific region. By 2030 it will be home to 3.2 billion middle-class consumers, who will be the world’s largest buyers of staple grains, fresh fruits and vegetables, dairy, meats and other farm products. The United States is one of a few countries, but not the only one, with the potential to provide these goods efficiently, safely, and economically. This market has the potential to be the foundation of American rural growth for a generation, bringing wealth and supporting jobs in rural areas, and encouraging rural young people to see their future in agriculture.

TPP will reduce barriers to trade for U.S. manufacturers and producers helping them grow their exports. While TPP countries are large buyers of American goods, some continue to impose high tariffs on certain American goods and maintain a wide array of non-tariff barriers that mean our exports fall below their potential. In some cases, these challenges are intensified by preferential access that these countries have under FTAs that do not include the United States, which place American factories and farms at a disadvantage vis-à-vis our competitors. With countries around the Asia-Pacific and beyond negotiating numerous bilateral and regional trade agreements, these disadvantages will grow even more significant without proactive American engagement. To secure sustained and high-quality economic growth, and the high-wage jobs that flow from it, we need an ambitious effort to open markets and promote exports to some of the fastest-growing markets in the world.

The Goods chapter of TPP will help us meet our goals by addressing the major barriers to American exports of manufactured goods and farm products from tariffs through non-tariff import barriers, export bans and subsidies, licensing and performance requirements, and more.

Section A: Definitions and Scope

Article 2.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

advertising films and recordings means recorded visual media or audio materials, consisting essentially of images and/or sound, showing the nature or operation of goods or services offered for sale or lease by a person established or resident in the territory of a Party, provided that such materials are of a kind suitable for exhibition to prospective customers but not for broadcast to the general public;

commercial samples of negligible value means commercial or trade samples having a value, individually or in the aggregate as shipped, of not more than one U.S. dollar, or the equivalent amount in the currency of another Party, or so marked, torn, perforated or otherwise treated that they are unsuitable for sale or for use except as commercial samples;

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining consular invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shippers’ export declarations, or any other customs documentation required on or in connection with importation;

consumed means (a) actually consumed; or (b) further processed or manufactured so as to result in a substantial change in the value, form, or use of the good or in the production of another good;

duty-free means free of customs duty;

good(s) means any merchandise, product, article or material;

goods admitted for sports purposes means sports requisites for use in sports contests, demonstrations or training in the territory of the Party into whose territory such goods are admitted;

goods intended for display or demonstration includes their component parts, ancillary apparatus, and accessories;

import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission of an application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for importation into the territory of the importing Party;

Import Licensing Agreement means the WTO Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures;

performance requirement means a requirement that:

(a) a given level or percentage of goods or services be exported;

(b) domestic goods or services of the Party granting a waiver of customs duties or an import license be substituted for imported goods;

(c) a person benefiting from a waiver of customs duties or a requirement for an import license purchase other goods or services in the territory of the Party granting the waiver of customs duties or the import license, or accord a preference to domestically produced goods;

(d) a person benefiting from a waiver of customs duties or a requirement for an import license produce goods or supply services, in the territory of the Party granting the waiver of customs duties or the import license, with a given level or percentage of domestic content; or

(e) relates in any way to the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows;

but does not include a requirement that an imported good be:

(f) subsequently exported;

(g) used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported;

(h) substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported; or

(i) substituted by an identical or similar good that is subsequently exported; and

printed advertising materials means those goods classified in Chapter 49 of the Harmonized System, including brochures, pamphlets, leaflets, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by trade associations, tourist promotional materials and posters, that are used to promote, publicise or advertise a good or service, are essentially intended to advertise a good or service, and are supplied free of charge.

Article 2.2: Scope

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in goods of a Party.

Section: B — National Treatment and Market Access for Goods

Article 2.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Parties in accordance with Article III of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to this end, Article III of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment that regional level of government accords to any like, directly competitive, or substitutable goods, as the case may be, of the Party of which it forms a part.

3. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2-A (National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions).

Article 2.4: Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on an originating good.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in accordance with its Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination).

3. On the request of any Party, the requesting Party and one or more other Parties shall consult to consider accelerating the elimination of customs duties set out in the Schedules to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination).

4. An agreement between two or more of the Parties to accelerate the elimination of a customs duty on an originating good shall supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to their Schedules to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination) for that good when approved by each Party to that agreement in accordance with its applicable legal procedures. The parties to that agreement shall inform the other Parties as early as practicable before the new rate of customs duty takes effect.

5. A Party may at any time unilaterally accelerate the elimination of customs duties on originating goods of one or more of the other Parties set out in its Schedule in Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination). A Party shall inform the other Parties as early as practicable before the new rate of customs duty takes effect.

6. For greater certainty, no Party shall prohibit an importer from claiming for an originating good the rate of customs duty applied under the WTO Agreement.

7. For greater certainty, a Party may raise a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination) following a unilateral reduction for the year respective.

Article 2.5: Waiver of Customs Duties

1. No Party may adopt any new waiver of customs duties, or expand with respect to existing recipients or extend to any new recipient the application of an existing waiver of customs duties, where the waiver is conditioned, explicitly or implicitly, on the fulfilment of a performance requirement.

2. No Party may, explicitly or implicitly, condition on the fulfilment of a performance requirement the continuation of any existing waiver of customs duties

Article 2.6: Goods Re-entered after Repair or Alteration

1. No Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that re-enters its territory after that good has been temporarily exported from its territory to the territory of another Party for repair or alteration, regardless of whether such repair or alteration could be performed in the territory of the Party from which the good was exported for repair or alteration or has increased the value of the good.[1]

2. No Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, admitted temporarily from the territory of another Party for repair or alteration.

3. For the purposes of this Article, repair or alteration does not include an operation or process that:

(a) destroys a good’s essential characteristics or creates a new or commercially different good; or

(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good.

Article 2.7: Duty-Free Entry of Commercial Samples of Negligible Value and Printed Advertising Material

Each Party shall grant duty-free entry to commercial samples of negligible value and printed advertising material imported from the territory of another Party, regardless of their origin, but may require that:

(a) such samples be imported solely for the solicitation of orders for goods, or services provided from the territory, of another Party or a non-Party; or

(b) such advertising materials are imported in packets that each contain no more than one copy of each material and that neither such materials nor packets form part of a larger consignment.

Article 2.8: Temporary Admission of Goods

1. Each Party shall grant duty-free temporary admission for the following goods, regardless of their origin:

(a) professional equipment, including equipment for the press or television, software and broadcasting and cinematographic equipment, necessary for carrying out the business activity, trade or profession of a person who qualifies for temporary entry pursuant to the laws of the importing Party;

(b) goods intended for display or demonstration;

(c) commercial samples and advertising films and recordings; and

(d) goods admitted for sports purposes.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the person concerned and for reasons its customs authority considers valid, extend the time limit for temporary admission beyond the period initially fixed.

3. No Party may condition the duty-free temporary admission of goods referred to in Paragraph 1, other than to require that such goods:

(a) be used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national or resident of another Party in the exercise of the business activity, trade, profession, or sport of that person;

(b) not be sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) be accompanied by a security in an amount no greater than the charges that would otherwise be owed on entry or final importation, releasable on exportation of the good;

(d) be capable of identification when imported and exported;

(e) be exported on the departure of the person referenced in subparagraph (a), or within such other period reasonably related to the purpose of the temporary admission as the Party may establish, or within one year, unless extended;

(f) be admitted in no greater quantity than is reasonable for their intended use; and

(g) be otherwise admissible into the Party’s territory under its laws.

4. Each Party shall grant duty-free temporary admission for containers and pallets regardless of their origin, in use or to be used in the shipment of merchandise or goods in international traffic.

(a) For the purposes of this paragraph, container means an article of transport equipment that is fully or partially enclosed to constitute a compartment intended for containing merchandise or goods, is substantial and has an internal volume of one cubic meter or more, is of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use, is used in significant numbers in international traffic, is specially designed to facilitate the carriage of merchandise or goods by more than one mode of transport without intermediate reloading, and is designed both for ready handling, particularly when being transferred from one mode of transport to another, and to be easy to fill and to empty, but does not include vehicles, accessories or spare parts of vehicles, or packaging.[2]

(b) For the purposes of this paragraph, pallet means a small, portable platform, which consists of two decks separated by bearers or a single deck supported by feet, on which goods can be moved, stacked, and stored, and which is designed essentially for handling by means of fork lift trucks, pallet trucks, or other jacking devices.

5. If any condition that a Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been fulfilled, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charge that would normally be owed on the good plus any other charges or penalties provided for under its law.

6. Each Party shall adopt and maintain procedures providing for the expeditious release of goods admitted under this Article. To the extent possible, such procedures shall provide that when such a good accompanies a national or resident of another Party who is seeking temporary entry, the good shall be released simultaneously with the entry of that national or resident.

7. Each Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted under this Article to be exported through a customs port other than that through which it was admitted.

8. Each Party, in accordance with domestic law, shall provide that the importer or other person responsible for a good admitted under this Article shall not be liable for failure to export the good on presentation of satisfactory proof to the importing Party that the good has been destroyed within the original period fixed for temporary admission or any lawful extension.

9. Subject to Chapter 9 (Investment) and Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services):

(a) each Party shall allow a vehicle or container used in international traffic that enters its territory from the territory of another Party to exit its territory on any route that is reasonably related to the economic and prompt departure of such vehicle or container[3]

(b) no Party shall require any security or impose any penalty or charge solely by reason of any difference between the customs port of entry and the customs port of departure of a vehicle or container;

(c) no Party shall condition the release of any obligation, including any security that it imposes in respect of the entry of a vehicle or container into its territory on its exit through any particular customs port of departure; and

(d) no Party shall require that the vehicle or carrier bringing a container from the territory of another Party into its territory be the same vehicle or carrier that takes such container to the territory of that other Party, or to the territory of any other Party.

10. For purposes of paragraph 9, “vehicle” means a truck, a truck tractor, a tractor, a trailer unit or trailer, a locomotive, or a railway car or other railroad equipment.

Article 2.10: Ad hoc Discussions

1. Each Party shall designate a Contact Point for Trade in Goods to facilitate communications amongst the Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter, including any request or information conveyed under Article 26.5 relating to measures of a Party which affects the operation of this Chapter.

2. Any Party (“the requesting Party”) may request ad hoc discussions to discuss any matter arising under this Chapter (including specific non-tariff measures), except a matter that could be addressed under a Chapter-specific consultation mechanism established under another Chapter, that the requesting Party believes may adversely affect its interests in trade in goods by delivering a written request to another Party (“the requested Party”) through the Contact Points for Trade in Goods of the requesting Party and requested Party. The request shall be in writing and identify the reasons for the request, including a description of the requesting Party’s concerns and an indication of the provisions of this Chapter to which the concerns relate. The requesting Party may provide all the other Parties with a copy of the request.

3. To the extent that the Party to which the request is directed considers that the matter which is the subject of the request should be addressed under a Chapter-specific consultation mechanism established under another Chapter, it shall promptly notify the Contact Points for Trade in Goods of the requesting Party including the reasons it considers that the request should be addressed under the other mechanism and forward the request and such notification to the Parties’ respective contact points designated under Article 27.5 (Contact Points) for appropriate action.

4. Within 30 days of receipt of a request under paragraph 2, the requested Party shall provide a written reply to the requesting Party. Within 30 days of the requesting Party’s receipt of the reply, the requesting and requested Parties (“the discussing Parties”) shall meet in person or via electronic means to discuss the matter identified in the request. If the discussing Parties choose to meet in person, the meeting shall take place in the territory of the requested Party, unless otherwise decided by the discussing Parties.

5. Any Party may submit a written request to the discussing Parties to participate in the ad hoc discussions. If the matter has not been resolved prior to receipt of such request and if discussing Parties agree, such Party may participate in the ad hoc discussions held under this Article subject to such conditions as the discussing Parties may decide.

6. If the requesting Party believes that the matter is urgent, it may request that any discussions take place within a time frame shorter than that provided for under paragraph 4. Any Party may request urgent ad hoc discussions where a measure:

(a) is applied without prior notice or without an opportunity for Parties to avail themselves of the opportunities for ad hoc discussions provided in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4; and

(b) may threaten to impede the importation, sale or distribution of an originating good which is in the process of being transported from the exporting Party to the importing Party, or has not been released from Customs control or is in storage in a warehouse regulated by the Customs Administration of the importing Party.

7. Ad hoc discussions under this Article shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of any Party, including being without prejudice to rights pertaining to dispute settlement proceedings under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement).

Article 2.11: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party shall adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of another Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party, except in accordance with Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, and to this end Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretive notes are incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that the GATT 1994 rights and obligations incorporated by paragraph 1 prohibit, in any circumstances in which any other form of restriction is prohibited, a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted in enforcement of countervailing and antidumping duty orders and undertakings;

(b) import licensing conditioned on the fulfilment of a performance requirement; or

(c) voluntary export restraints inconsistent with Article VI of the GATT 1994, as implemented under Article 18 of the SCM Agreement and Article 8.1 of the AD Agreement.

3. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 applies to the importation of commercial cryptographic goods.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3:

commercial cryptographic goods means any good implementing or incorporating cryptography, where the good is not designed or modified specifically for government use and is sold or otherwise made available to the public.

5. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2-A (National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions).

6. In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation from or exportation to a non-Party of a good, no provision of this Agreement shall be construed to prevent that Party from:

(a) limiting or prohibiting the importation of the good of the non-Party from the territory of another Party; or

(b) requiring as a condition for exporting the good of that Party to the territory of another Party, that the good not be re-exported to the non-Party, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in the territory of the other Party.

7. In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good from a non-Party, the Parties, on the request of any Party, shall consult with a view to avoiding undue interference with or distortion of pricing, marketing, or distribution arrangements in another Party.

8. No Party may, as a condition for engaging in importation or for the importation of a good, require a person of another Party to establish or maintain a contractual or other relationship with a distributor in its territory.[4]

9. For greater certainty, paragraph 8 does not prevent a Party from requiring that a person referred to in that paragraph designate a point of contact for the purpose of facilitating communications between its regulatory authorities and that person.

10. For the purposes of paragraph 8:

distributor means a person of a Party who is responsible for the commercial distribution, agency, concession, or representation in the territory of that Party of goods of another Party;

Article 2.12: Remanufactured Goods

1. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 of Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) applies to prohibitions and restrictions on the importation of remanufactured goods.

2. If a Party adopts or maintains measures prohibiting or restricting the importation of used goods, it shall not apply those measures to remanufactured goods.[5][6]

Article 2.13: Import Licensing

1. No Party may adopt or maintain a measure that is inconsistent with the Import Licensing Agreement.

2. Promptly after this Agreement enters into force for a Party, that Party shall notify the other Parties of its existing import licensing procedures, if any. The notification shall include the information specified in Article 5.2 of the Import Licensing Agreement and any information required under paragraph 6.

3. A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraph 2 with respect to an existing import licensing procedure if:

(a) it has notified that procedure to the Committee on Import Licensing provided for in Article 4 of the Import Licensing Agreement together with the information specified in Article 5.2 of that agreement;

(b) in the most recent annual submission due before entry into force of this Agreement for that Party to the Committee on Import Licensing in response to the annual questionnaire on import licensing procedures described in Article 7.3 of the Import Licensing Agreement, it has provided, with respect to that procedure, the information requested in that questionnaire; and

(c) it has included in either the notification described in subparagraph (a) or the annual submission described in subparagraph (b) any information required to be notified to the other Parties to this Agreement under paragraph 6.

4. Each Party shall comply with Article 1.4(a) of the Import Licensing Agreement with respect to any new or modified import licensing procedure. A Party shall publish on an official government internet site any information that it is required to publish under Article 1.4(a) of the Import Licensing Agreement in a source that it has notified to the Committee on Import Licensing.

5. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of any new import licensing procedures it adopts and any modifications it makes to its existing import licensing procedures, whenever possible, no later than 60 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect. In no case shall a Party provide such notification later than 60 days following the date of its publication. The notification shall include any information required under paragraph 6. A Party that notifies a new import licensing procedure or a modification to an existing import licensing procedure to the Committee on Import Licensing in accordance with Articles 5.1 to 5.3 of the Import Licensing Agreement and that includes in its notification any information required to be notified to the other Parties to this Agreement under paragraph 6 shall be deemed to have complied with this requirement.

6. (a) A notification made pursuant to paragraph 2, 3, or 5 shall state if, under any procedure that is a subject of the notification:

(i) the terms of an import license for any product limit the permissible end users of the product; or

(ii) the Party imposes any of the following conditions on eligibility for obtaining a license to import any product:

(A) membership in an industry association;

(B) approval by industry association of the request for an import license;

(C) a history of importing the product or similar products;

(D) minimum importer or end user production capacity;

(E) minimum importer or end user registered capital; or

(F) a contractual or other relationship between the importer and a distributor in the Party’s territory.

(b) Any notification stating, pursuant to subparagraph (a), the existence of a limitation on permissible end users or a license-eligibility condition shall:

(i) list all products for which the end-user limitation or license eligibility condition applies; and

(ii) describe the end-user limitation or license-eligibility condition.

7. Each Party shall respond within 60 days to a reasonable enquiry from another Party concerning its licensing rules and its procedures for the submission of an application for an import license, including the eligibility of persons, firms, and institutions to make such an application, the administrative body(ies) to be approached, and the list of products subject to the licensing requirement.

8. Where a Party has denied an import license application with respect to a good of another Party, it shall, on request of the applicant and within a reasonable period after receiving the request, provide the applicant with a written explanation of the reason(s) for the denial.

9. No Party shall apply an import licensing procedure to a good of another Party unless it has, with respect to that procedure, met the requirements of paragraph 2 or paragraph 4, as applicable.

Article 2.14: Transparency in Export Licensing Procedures[7]

1. Within 30 days after the date this Agreement enters into force, each Party shall notify the other Parties in writing of the publications in which its export licensing procedures, if any, are set out, including addresses of relevant government websites. Thereafter, each Party shall publish in the notified publications and websites any new export licensing procedure, or any modification of an export licensing procedure, it adopts as soon as practicable but no later than 30 days after the new procedure or modification takes effect.

2. Each Party shall ensure that it includes in the publications it has notified under paragraph 1:

(a) the texts of its export licensing procedures, including any modifications it makes to these procedures;

(b) the goods subject to each licensing procedure;

(c) for each procedure, a description of:

(i) the process for applying for a license;

(ii) any criteria an applicant must meet to be eligible to seek a license, such as possessing an activity license, establishing or maintaining an investment, or operating through a particular form of establishment in a Party’s territory;

(d) a contact point or points from which interested persons can obtain further information on the conditions for obtaining an export license;

(e) the administrative body or bodies to which an application or other relevant documentation must be submitted;

(f) a description of or a citation to a publication reproducing in full any measure or measures that the export licensing procedure is designed to implement;

(g) the period during which each export licensing procedure will be in effect, unless the procedure will remain in effect until withdrawn or revised in a new publication;

(h) if the Party intends to use a licensing procedure to administer an export quota, the overall quantity and, where practicable, value of the quota and the opening and closing dates of the quota; and

(i) any exemptions or exceptions available to the public that replace the requirement to obtain an export license, how to request or use these exemptions or exceptions, and the criteria for them.

3. Except where doing so would reveal business proprietary or other confidential information of a particular person, on the request of another Party that has a substantial trade interest in the matter, a Party shall provide, to the extent possible, the following information regarding a particular export licensing procedure that it adopts or maintains:

(a) the aggregate number of licenses the Party has granted over a recent period that the requesting Party has specified; and

(b) measures, if any, that the Party has taken in conjunction with the licensing procedure to restrict domestic production or consumption or to stabilize production, supply, or prices for the relevant good(s).

4. Nothing in this Article shall be construed in a manner that would require a Party to grant an export license, or that would prevent a Party from implementing its obligations/commitments under United Nations Security Council Resolutions, as well as multilateral non-proliferation regimes, including: the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies; the Nuclear Suppliers Group; the Australia Group; the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, done at Paris, January 13, 1993;the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, done at Washington, London, and Moscow, April 10, 1972; the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; and the Missile Technology Control Regime.

5. For the purposes of this Article:

export licensing procedure means a requirement that a Party adopts or maintains under which an exporter must, as a condition for exporting a good from the Party’s territory, submit an application or other documentation to an administrative body or bodies, but does not include customs documentation required in the normal course of trade or any requirement that must be fulfilled prior to introduction of the good into commerce within the Party’s territory.

Article 2.15: Administrative Fees and Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of the GATT 1994 and its interpretive notes, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than export taxes, customs duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge applied consistently with Article III:2 of GATT 1994, and antidumping and countervailing duties) imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent an indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes.

2. No Party may require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of any good of the other Parties.

3. Each Party shall make available through the Internet a current list of the fees and charges it imposes in connection with importation or exportation.

4. No Party shall levy fees and charges on or in connection with importation or exportation on an ad valorem basis.[8]

5. Each Party shall periodically review its fees and charges with a view to reducing their number and diversity, where practicable.

Article 2.16: Export Duties, Taxes or Other Charges

Except as provided for in Annex 2-C (Export Duties, Taxes or Other Charges), no Party may adopt or maintain any duty, tax, or other charge on the export of any good to the territory of another Party, unless such duty, tax or charge is adopted or maintained on any such good when destined for domestic consumption.

Article 2.17: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods (Committee), comprising representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall meet at such times as the Parties mutually decide to consider any matters arising under this Chapter. Meetings shall take place in such locations and through such means as the Parties mutually decide. During the first five years after entry into force of this Agreement, the Committee shall meet no less than once a year.

3. The Committee’s functions shall include:

(a) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through consultations on accelerating tariff elimination under this Agreement and other issues as appropriate;

(b) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties, other than those within the competence of TPP bodies other than the Commission, especially those related to the application of non-tariff measures, and, if appropriate, referring such matters to the Commission for its consideration;

(c) reviewing the future amendments to the Harmonized System to ensure that each Party’s obligations under this Agreement are not altered, including by establishing, as needed, guidelines for the transposition of Parties’ Schedules to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination), and consulting to resolve any conflicts between:

(i) amendments to the Harmonized System and Annex 2-D; or

(ii) Annex 2-D and national nomenclatures;

(d) consulting on and endeavouring to resolve any difference that may arise among the Parties on matters related to the classification of goods under the Harmonized System and Annex 2-D; and

(e) undertaking any additional work that the Commission may assign to it.

4. The Committee shall consult, as appropriate, with other committees established under this Agreement when addressing issues of relevance to those committees.

5. The Committee shall, within two years of entry into force of this Agreement, submit to the Commission an initial report on its work under subparagraphs 3(a) and 3(b). In producing this report, the Committee shall consult, as appropriate, with the Committee on Agricultural Trade established under Section C of this Chapter and the Committee on Textile and Apparel Trade Matters established under Chapter 4 of the Agreement on portions of the report of relevance to those committees.

Article 2.19: Publication

Each Party shall promptly publish the following information in a non-discriminatory and easily accessible manner, in order to enable interested parties to become acquainted with them:

(a) importation, exportation and transit procedures (including port, airport, and other entry-point procedures) and required forms and documents;

(b) applied rates of duty, and taxes of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation;

(c) rules for the classification or the valuation of products for customs purposes;

(d) laws, regulations and administrative rulings of general application relating to rules of origin;

(e) import, export or transit restrictions or prohibitions;

(f) fees and charges imposed on or in connection with importation, exportation or transit;

(g) penalty provisions against breaches of import, export or transit formalities;

(h) appeal procedures;

(i) agreements or parts thereof with any country or countries relating to importation, exportation or transit;

(j) administrative procedures relating to the imposition of tariff quotas; and,

(k) correlation tables showing correspondence between any new national nomenclature and the previous national nomenclature.

Article 2.20: Trade in Information Technology Products

Each Party shall be a participant in the WTO Ministerial Declaration on Trade in Information Technology Products (Information Technology Agreement, or ITA) and have completed the procedures for modification and rectification of its Schedule of Tariff Concessions, set out in the Decision of 26 March 1980, L/4962, in accordance with paragraph 2 of the ITA.[9]

Section C — Agriculture

Article 2.21: Definitions

For the purposes of this Section:

agricultural goods means those goods referred to in Article 2 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture;

export subsidies shall have the meaning assigned to that term in Article 1(e) of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, including any amendment of that article;

modern biotechnology means the application of:

(a) in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or

(b) fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family,

that overcome natural physiological reproductive or recombinant barriers and that are not techniques used in traditional breeding and selection; and

products of modern biotechnology means agricultural goods, as well as fish and fish products[10], developed using modern biotechnology, but does not include medicines and medical products.

2.22: Scope

This Section applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to trade in agricultural goods.

Article 2.23: Agricultural Export Subsidies

1. The Parties share the objective of the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for agricultural goods and shall work together to achieve an agreement in the WTO to eliminate those subsidies and prevent their reintroduction in any form.

2. No Party may adopt or maintain any export subsidy on any agricultural good destined for the territory of another Party[11].

Article 2.24: Export Credits, Export Credit Guarantees or Insurance Programmes

Recognizing the ongoing work in the WTO in the area of export competition and that export competition remains a key priority in multilateral negotiations, Parties shall work together in the WTO to develop multilateral disciplines to govern the provision of export credits, export credit guarantees and insurance programs, including disciplines on matters such as transparency, self-financing, and repayment terms.

Article 2.25: Agricultural Export State Trading Enterprises

1. The Parties shall work together toward an agreement in the WTO on export state trading enterprises that requires:

(a) the elimination of trade distorting restrictions on the authorization to export agricultural goods;

(b) the elimination of any special financing that a WTO Member grants directly or indirectly to state trading enterprises that export for sale a significant share of the Member’s total exports of an agricultural good; and

(c) greater transparency regarding the operation and maintenance of export state trading enterprises.

Article 2.26: Export Restrictions — Food Security

1. Parties recognize that under Article XI.2(a) of GATT 1994, a Party may temporarily apply an export prohibition or restriction that is otherwise prohibited under Article XI.1 of GATT 1994 on foodstuffs[12] to prevent or relieve a critical shortage of foodstuffs, subject to meeting the conditions set out in Article 12.1 of the Agreement on Agriculture.

2. Further to the conditions under which a Party may apply an export prohibition or restriction, other than a duty, tax, or other charge on food stuffs:

(a) Any Party that:

(i) imposes such a prohibition or restriction, on the exportation or sale for export of foodstuffs to another Party to prevent or relieve a critical shortage of foodstuffs, shall in all cases notify the measure to the other Parties prior to its effective date, and, except where the critical shortage is caused by an event constituting force majeure, shall notify the measure to the other Parties at least 30 days prior to its effective date; or

(ii) as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party maintains such a prohibition or restriction, shall, within 30 days of that date, notify the measure to the other Parties.

(b) A notification under this paragraph shall include the reasons for imposing or maintaining the prohibition or restriction, as well as an explanation of how the measure is consistent with Article XI.2(a) of GATT 1994, and shall note alternative measures, if any, that the Party considered before imposing the prohibition or restriction.

(c) A measure shall not be subject to notification under this paragraph or paragraph 4 if it prohibits or restricts the exportation or sale for export only of a foodstuff or foodstuffs of which the Party imposing the measure has been a net importer during each of the three calendar years preceding imposition of the measure, excluding the year in which the Party imposes the measure.

(d) If a Party that adopts or maintains a measure referred to in subparagraph (a) has been a net importer of each foodstuff subject to that measure during each of the three calendar years preceding imposition of the measure, excluding the year in which the Party imposes the measure, and that Party does not provide the other Parties with a notification under subparagraph (a), the Party shall, within a reasonable period of time, provide to all other Parties trade data demonstrating that it was a net importer of the foodstuff or foodstuffs during these three calendar years.

3. Any Party required to notify a measure pursuant to paragraph 2(a) shall:

(a) consult, upon request, with any other Party having a substantial interest as an importer of the foodstuffs subject to the measure, with respect to any matter related to the measure;

(b) upon the request of any Party having a substantial interest as an importer of the foodstuffs subject to the measure, provide that Party with relevant economic indicators bearing on whether a critical shortage within the meaning of Article XI.2(a) of GATT 1994 exists or is likely to occur in the absence of the measure, and on how the measure will prevent or relieve the critical shortage; and

(c) respond in writing to any question posed by any other Party regarding the measure within 14 days from receipt of the question.

4. Any Party which considers that another Party should have notified a measure under paragraph 2(a) may bring the matter to the attention of such other Party. If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved promptly thereafter, the Party which considers that the measure should have been notified may itself bring the measure to the attention of the other Parties.

5. A Party should ordinarily terminate a measure subject to notification under paragraphs 2(a) or 4 within 6 months of the date it is imposed. A Party contemplating continuation of a measure beyond 6 months from the date it is imposed shall so notify the other Parties no later than 5 months following the date the measure is imposed and provide the information specified in subparagraph 2(b). Unless it has consulted with all other Parties who are net importers of any foodstuff the exportation of which is prohibited or restricted under the measure, the Party shall not continue the measure beyond 12 months from the date it is imposed. The Party shall immediately discontinue the measure at such time that the critical shortage, or threat thereof, no longer exists.

6. No Party shall apply any measure subject to notification under paragraphs 2(a) or 4 to food purchased for non-commercial humanitarian purposes.

Article 2.27: Committee on Agricultural Trade

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Agricultural Trade with representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee on Agricultural Trade shall provide a forum for:

(a) promoting trade in agricultural goods between the Parties under this Agreement and other issues as appropriate;

(b) monitoring and promoting cooperation on the implementation and administration of this Section, including notification of export restrictions on agricultural products as stipulated in Article 2.26 (Export Restrictions-Food Security), and discussing the cooperative work identified in Article 2.23 (Agricultural Export Subsidies), Article 2.24 (Export Credits, Export Credit Guarantees or Insurance Programmes) and Article 2.25 (Agricultural Export State Trading Enterprises);

(c) consultation among the Parties on matters related to this Section in coordination with other committees, subcommittees, working groups, or other bodies established under this Agreement;

(d) undertaking any additional work that the Committee on Trade in Goods and the Commission may assign.

3. The Committee on Agricultural Trade shall meet at such times as the Parties mutually decide. Meetings shall take place in such locations and through such means as the Parties mutually decide. During the first five years after entry into force of this Agreement, the Committee shall meet no less than once a year.

Article 2.28: Agricultural Safeguards

Originating agricultural goods from any Party shall not be subject to any duties applied pursuant to any special safeguard taken under the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.

Article 2.29: Trade of Products of Modern Biotechnology

1. The Parties confirm the importance of transparency, cooperation and exchanging information related to the trade of products of modern biotechnology.

2. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from adopting measures in accordance with its rights and obligations under the WTO Agreements or other provisions of this Agreement.

3. Nothing in this Article shall require a Party to adopt or modify its laws, regulations, and policies for the control of products of modern biotechnology within its territory.

4. When available and subject to its laws, regulations and policies, each Party shall make available publicly:

(a) any documentation requirements for completing an application for the authorization of a product of modern biotechnology;

(b) a summary of any risk or safety assessment that has led to the authorization of a product of modern biotechnology; and

(c) a list or lists of the products of modern biotechnology that have been authorized in its territory.

5. Each Party shall identify contact point(s) for the sharing of information on issues related to low level presence (LLP)[13] occurrences.

6. In order to address an LLP occurrence, and with a view to preventing a future LLP occurrence, at the request of an importing Party, an exporting Party shall, where available and subject to its laws, regulations and policies:

(a) provide a summary of the risk or safety assessment or assessments, if any, that the exporting party conducted in connection with an authorization of a specific plant product of modern biotechnology;

(b) provide, if known to the exporting Party, contact information for any entity within its territory that received authorization for the plant product of modern biotechnology and whom the Party believes is likely to possess:

(i) any existing, validated methods for the detection of the plant product of modern biotechnology found at a low level in a shipment;

(ii) any reference sample necessary for the detection of the LLP occurrence; and

(iii) relevant information that can be used by the importing Party to conduct a risk or safety assessment or, if a food safety assessment is appropriate, relevant information for a food safety assessment in accordance with Annex 3 of the Codex Guideline for the conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant-DNA Plants (CAC/GL 45–2003);and

(c) encourage the entity to share information referred to in 2(b) with the importing Party.

7. In the event of an LLP occurrence, the importing Party shall, subject to its laws, regulations and policies:

(a) inform the importer or the importer’s agent of the LLP occurrence and of any additional information which the importer will be required to submit to allow the importing Party to make a decision on the disposition of the shipment in which the LLP occurrence has been found;

(b) when available, provide to the exporting Party a summary of any risk or safety assessment that the importing Party has conducted in connection with the LLP occurrence;

(c) ensure that the measures[14] applied to address the LLP occurrence are appropriate to achieve compliance with its domestic laws, regulations and policies.

8. To reduce the likelihood of trade disruptions from LLP occurrences:

(a) each exporting party shall consistent with its domestic laws, regulations, and policies endeavor to encourage technology developers to submit applications to Parties for authorization of plants and plant products of modern biotechnology; and

(b) a Party authorizing plant and plant products derived from modern biotechnology shall endeavor to:

(i) allow year-round submission and review of applications for authorization of plants and plant products of modern biotechnology; and

(ii) increase communications among and between the Parties regarding new authorizations of plants and plant products of modern biotechnology so as to improve global information exchange.

9. The Parties hereby establish a working group on products of modern biotechnology under the Committee on Agricultural Trade (Working Group) for information exchange and cooperation on trade-related matters associated with products of modern biotechnology. The Working Group shall be comprised of representatives of all Parties that, in writing, inform the Committee on Agricultural Trade that they will participate in the Working Group and name one or more representatives to the Working Group.

10. The Working Group shall provide a forum to:

(a) exchange, subject to a Party’s laws, regulations and policies, information on issues, including on existing and proposed domestic laws, regulations and policies related to the trade of products of modern biotechnology; and

(b) further enhance cooperation among two or more Parties, where there is mutual interest related to the trade of products of modern biotechnology.

11. The Working Group may meet in person, or by any other means as mutually determined by the Parties who have named representatives to the Working Group.

Section D: Tariff Rate Quota Administration

Article 2.30: Scope and General Provisions

1. Each Party shall implement and administer tariff-rate quotas (TRQs[15]) in accordance with Article XIII of GATT 1994 (including its interpretive notes), the Import Licensing Agreement and Article 2.13 (Import Licensing). All TRQs established by a Party under this Agreement shall be incorporated into that Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination).

2. Each Party shall ensure that its procedures for administering its TRQs are made available to the public, are fair and equitable, are no more administratively burdensome than absolutely necessary, are responsive to market conditions and are administered in a timely manner.

3. The Party administering a TRQ shall publish all information concerning its TRQ administration, including the size of quotas and eligibility requirements; and, if the TRQ will be allocated, application procedures, the application deadline, and the methodology or procedures that will be used for the allocation or reallocation, on its designated publicly available website at least 90 days prior to the opening date of the TRQ concerned.

Article 2.31: Administration and Eligibility

1. Each Party shall administer its TRQs in a manner that allows importers the opportunity to utilise fully TRQ quantities.

2. (a) Except as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c), no Party shall introduce a new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement on the utilisation of a TRQ for importation of a good, including in relation to specification or grade, permissible end-use of the imported product or package size beyond those set out in its Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination). [16]

(b) A Party seeking to introduce a new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement on the utilisation of a TRQ for importation of a good shall notify the other Parties at least 45 days prior to the proposed effective date of the new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement. Any Party with a demonstrable commercial interest in supplying the good may submit a request in writing to the Party seeking to introduce the new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement requesting consultations. Upon receipt of such a request for consultations, the Party seeking to introduce the new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement shall promptly undertake consultations with the Party submitting the request, in accordance with paragraph 6 of Article 2.34 (Transparency).

(c) The Party seeking to introduce the new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement may do so if:

(i) it has consulted with any Party with demonstrable commercial interest in supplying the good that has submitted in writing a request for consultations pursuant to subparagraph (b); and

(ii) no Party with a demonstrable commercial interest in supplying the good that submitted in writing a request for consultations pursuant to subparagraph (b) objected, after the consultation, to the introduction of the new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement.

(d) A new or additional condition, limit or eligibility requirement that is the outcome of any consultation held pursuant to subparagraph (c), shall be circulated to Parties prior to implementation.

Article 2.32: Allocation[17]

1. In the event that access under a TRQ is subject to an allocation mechanism, each importing Party shall ensure that:

(a) Any person of a Party that fulfils the importing Party’s eligibility requirements shall be able to apply and to be considered for a quota allocation under the TRQs.

(b) Unless otherwise agreed, it does not allocate any portion of the quota to a producer group, condition access to an allocation on the purchase of domestic production, or limit access to an allocation to processors.

(c) Each allocation shall be made in commercially viable shipping quantities and, to the maximum extent possible, in the amounts that importers request.

(d) An allocation for in-quota imports shall be applicable to any tariff lines subject to the TRQ and be valid throughout the TRQ year.

(e) Where the aggregate TRQ quantity requested by applicants exceeds the quota size, allocation to eligible applicants shall be conducted by equitable and transparent methods.

(f) Applicants shall have at least four weeks after the opening of the application period to submit their applications.

(g) Quota allocation takes place no later than four weeks before the opening of the quota period, except where allocation is based in whole or in part on import performance during the 12-month period immediately preceding the quota period. Where the Party bases an allocation in whole or in part on import performance during the 12-month period immediately preceding the quota period, the Party shall make a provisional allocation of the full quota amount no later than four weeks before the opening of the quota period. All final allocation decisions, including any revisions, shall be made and communicated to applicants by the beginning of the quota period.

2. During the first quota year the Agreement is in force for a Party, if less than twelve months remain in the quota year at the time of entry into force of the Agreement for that Party, the Party shall make available to quota applicants, beginning on the date of entry into force of the Agreement for the Party, the quota quantity established in its Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination), multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which shall be a whole number consisting of the number of months remaining in the quota year at the time of entry into force of the Agreement for the Party, including the entirety of the month in which the Agreement enters into force for the Party, and the denominator of which shall be twelve.

(a) The Party shall make the entire quota quantity established in its Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination) available to quota applicants beginning on the first day of each quota year thereafter that the quota is in operation.

3. The Party administering a TRQ shall not require the re-export of a good as a condition for application for, or utilisation of, a quota allocation.

4. Any quantity of goods imported under a TRQ under this Agreement shall not be counted towards, or reduce the quantity of, any other TRQs provided for such goods in a Party’s WTO tariff schedules or under any other trade agreements.[18]

Article 2.33: Return and Reallocation of Quotas

1. Where a TRQ is administered by an allocation mechanism, each Party shall ensure there is a mechanism for the return and reallocation of unused allocations in a timely and transparent manner, providing the greatest possible opportunity for the TRQ to be filled.

2. Each Party shall publish on a regular basis on its designated publicly available web site all information concerning amounts allocated, amounts returned and, when available, quota utilisation rates. In addition, each Party shall publish on the same web site amounts available for reallocation, and the application deadline, at least two weeks prior to the date the Party will begin accepting applications for reallocations.

Article 2.34: Transparency

1. Each Party shall identify the entity or entities responsible for administering its TRQs, designate at least one contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on matters relating to the administration of its TRQs, and provide details of its contact point(s) to the other Parties. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Parties of any amendments to the details of their contact point(s).

2. Where a TRQ is administered by an allocation mechanism, the name and address of allocation holders shall be published on the designated publicly available website.

3. Where a TRQ is administered on a first-come, first-served basis, over the course of each year, the importing Party’s administering authority shall publish, in a timely and continually on-going fashion on its designated publicly available website, utilization rates and remaining available quantities for each TRQ.

4. Where a TRQ is administered on a first-come, first-served basis, and when a TRQ of an importing Party fills, that Party shall publish a notice to this effect on its designated publicly available website within 10 days.

5. Where a TRQ is administered by an allocation mechanism, and when a TRQ of an importing Party fills, that Party shall publish a notice to this effect on its designated publicly available website as early as practicable.

6. At the written request of an exporting Party or Parties, the Party administrating a TRQ shall consult with the exporting Party regarding the administration of its TRQ.

Annex 2-A: National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions

1. For greater certainty, nothing in this Annex shall affect the rights or obligations of any Party under the WTO Agreement with respect to any measure listed in the Annex.

2. Article 2.3 (National Treatment) and Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to the continuation, renewal, or amendment made to any law, statute, decree or administrative regulations giving rise to a measure set out in this Annex to the extent that the continuation, renewal, or amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure listed with Article 2.3 (National Treatment) and Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions).

Measures of Brunei Darussalam

Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to the goods specified in section 31 of Customs Order 2006.

Measures of Canada

1. Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to:

(a) the export of logs of all species;

(b) the export of unprocessed fish pursuant to applicable provincial legislation;

(c) the importation of goods of the prohibited provisions of tariff items 9897.00.00, 9898.00.00 and 9899.00.00 referred to in the Schedule of the Customs Tariff;

(d) Canadian excise duties on absolute alcohol, as listed under tariff item 2207.10.90 in Canada’s Schedule of Concessions annexed to the Marrakesh Protocol (Schedule V), used in manufacturing under the existing provisions of the Excise Act, 2001, 2002, c.22, as amended;

(e) the use of ships in the coasting trade of Canada;

(f) the internal sale and distribution of wine and distilled spirits;

2. Article 2.3 (National Treatment) shall not apply to a measure affecting the production, publication, exhibition, or sale of goods[19] that supports the creation, development or accessibility of Canadian artistic expression or content.

Measures of Chile

Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to measures of Chile relating to imports of used vehicles.

Measures of Mexico

1. Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply:

(a) to restrictions pursuant to Article 48 of the Hydrocarbons Law (Ley de Hidrocarburos) published in Mexico’s Diario Oficial on August 11, 2014, on the exportation from Mexico of the goods provided for in the following items of Mexico’s tariff schedule of the General Import and Export Duties Law (“Tarifa de la Ley de los Impuestos Generales de Importación y de Exportación”) published in Mexico’s Diario Oficial on June 18, 2007 and June 29, 2012:

HS

Code Description

2709.00.01

Crude petroleum oils

2709.00.99

Other

2710.12.04

Gasoline, excluding those of code 2710.12.03

2710.19.04

Gasoil (diesel) or diesel oil and mixtures thereof

2710.19.05

Fueloil

2710.19.07

Paraffin oil

2710.19.08

Turbosine (kerosene, lamp oil) and blends thereof

2710.19.99

Other

2711.11.01

Natural gas

2711.12.01

Propane

2711.13.01

Butanes

2711.19.01

Butane and propane, mixed and liquefied

2711.19.99

Other

2711.21.01

Natural gas

2711.29.99

Other

2712.20.01

Paraffin wax containing less than 0.75% of oil, by weight

2712.90.02

Microcrystalline waxes

2712.90.04

Waxes, excluding those of codes 2712.90.01 and 2712.90.02

2712.90.99

Other

(b) during the period prior to January 1, 2019, to prohibitions or restrictions on the importation into Mexico of gasoline and diesel fuel set forth in Article 123 of the Ley de Hydrocarburos (Hydrocarbons Law), published in Mexico’s Diario Oficial on August 11, 2014; and

(c) to prohibitions or restrictions on the importation into Mexico of used tires, used apparel, used vehicles and used chassis equipped with vehicle motors set forth in paragraphs 1(I) and 5 of Annex 2.2.1 of the Resolution through which the Ministry of Economy establishes rules and general criteria on International Trade (“Acuerdo por el que la Secretaría de Economía emite reglas y criterios de carácter general en materia de Comercio Exterior”), published in Mexico’s Diario Oficial on December 31, 2012.

2. The Commission shall review paragraph 1(a) pursuant to any review conducted under Article 27.2.1(b).

Measures of Peru

1. Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to:

(a) used clothing and footwear pursuant to Law No. 28514 of May 23, 2005;

(b) used vehicles and used automotive engines, parts and replacements pursuant to Legislative Decree No. 843 of August 30, 1996, Urgent Decree No. 079–2000 of September 20, 2000, Urgent Decree No. 050–2008 of December 18, 2008;

(c) used tires pursuant to Supreme Decree No. 003–97-SA of June 7, 1997; and

(d) used goods, machinery and equipment which utilize radioactive energy sources pursuant to Law No. 27757 of June 19, 2002.

Measures of the United States

1. Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to:

(a) controls on the export of logs of all species;

(b) measures under existing provisions of the Merchant Marine Act of 1920, 46 App. U.S.C. § 883; the Passenger Vessel Act, 46 App. U.S.C. §§ 289, 292, and 316; and 46 U.S.C. § 12108, to the extent that such measures were mandatory legislation at the time of the accession of the United States to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1947 (GATT 1947) and have not been amended so as to decrease their conformity with Part II of the GATT 1947.

Measures of Viet Nam

Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to:

(a) a prohibition on importation, set out in Decree No. 187/ND-CP dated 20 November 2013 of the Government of Viet Nam or Circular No. 04/2014/TT-BCT dated 27 January 2014 of the Ministry of Industry and Trade guiding the implementation of the Decree No. 187/ND-CP, with respect to a good listed in (i) through (iv) of this subparagraph. The goods listed in (i) through (iv) of this subparagraph are:

(i) right-hand drive motor vehicles (including right-hand drive motor vehicles modified after manufacture to be left-hand drive vehicles), except specialized right-hand drive vehicles that generally operate in small areas such as cranes, trench and canal digging machines, garbage trucks, road sweepers, road construction trucks, airport passenger transportation buses, fork-lifts used at warehouses and ports;

(ii) vehicle components usable exclusively in right-hand drive motor vehicles that are not specialized right-hand drive vehicles;

(iii) motor vehicles more than five years old;

(iv) used[20]:

(A) textiles, clothing and footwear;

(B) computer printers, fax machines, and computer disk drives;

(C) laptop computers;

(D) refrigeration equipment;

(E) household electrical appliances;

(F) medical equipment;

(G) furniture;

(H) household goods made from porcelain, clay, glass, metal, resin, rubber, and plastic;

(I) frames, tyres (outer and inner), tubes, accessories, and engines of automobiles, tractors, and other motor vehicles;

(J) internal combustion engines with a capacity below 30 CV and machines with an internal combustion engine with a capacity below 30 CV; and

(K) bicycles and tricycles; and

(b) a prohibition on exportation, set out in Decree No. 187/ND-CP dated 20 November 2013 of the Government of Viet Nam or Circular No. 04/2014/TT-BCT dated 27 January 2014 of the Ministry of Industry and Trade guiding the implementation of the Decree No. 187/ND-CP, with respect to a good listed in (i) through (ii) of this subparagraph. The goods listed in (i) through (ii) of this subparagraph are:

(i) round and sawn timber produced from domestic natural forests; and

(ii) wooden products (except handicrafts and products produced from wood of cultivated forests, imported wood or artificial pallet).

Kimberley Process Certification Scheme

Article 2.11 (Import and Export Restrictions) shall not apply to the import and export of rough diamonds (HS codes 7102.10, 7102.21 and 7102.31), pursuant to the Kimberley Process Certification scheme and any subsequent amendments to that scheme.

Annex 2-B: Remanufactured Goods

1. Article 2.12.2 (Remanufactured Goods) shall not apply to measures of Vietnam prohibiting or restricting the importation of remanufactured goods until three years after the date of entry into force of the Agreement for Vietnam. Beginning three years after the date of entry into force of the Agreement for Vietnam, Article 2.12.2 shall apply to all measures of Vietnam, except as provided in paragraph 2 of this Annex.

2. Article 2.12.2 (Remanufactured Goods) shall not apply to a prohibition or restriction by Vietnam, set out in Decree No. 187/ND-CP dated 20 November 2013 of the Government of Viet Nam or Circular No. 04/2014/TT-BCT dated 27 January 2014 of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, on the importation of a good listed in Table 2-B-1.

3. For greater certainty, Vietnam shall not:

(a) apply any prohibition or restriction on the importation of a remanufactured good that is more stringent than the prohibition or restriction it applies to the importation of the same good, when used; or

(b) re-impose any prohibition or restriction on the importation of a remanufactured good following the removal of the prohibition or restriction.

Bicycles and other cycles (including delivery tricycles), not motorized (except for racing bicycles in 8712.00.10)

Annex 2-C: Export Duties, Taxes or Other Charges

1. Article 2.16 (Export Duties, Taxes or Other Charges) shall apply to goods provided for in the items listed in a Party’s section to this Annex only as specified below.

2. With respect to a good provided for in an item listed in Section 1 to this Annex, Malaysia shall not apply any export duties, taxes or other charges in an amount greater than that specified for that item in Section 1 to this Annex.

3. With respect to a good provided for in an item listed in Section 2 to this Annex, Vietnam shall eliminate any export duties, taxes or other charges in accordance with the following categories, as indicated for each item listed in Section 2 to this Annex:

(a) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category A may remain in place for five years but shall not exceed the base rate. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year six;

(b) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category B may remain in place for seven years but shall not exceed the base rate. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year eight;

(c) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category C shall be eliminated in 11 equal annual stages. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 11;

(d) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category D may remain in place for ten years but shall not exceed the base rate. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 11;

(e) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category E shall be eliminated in 13 equal annual stages. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 13;

(f) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category F may remain in place for 12 years but shall not exceed the base rate. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 13;

(g) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category G shall be eliminated in 16 equal annual stages. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 16;

(h) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category H may remain in place for 15 years but shall not exceed the base rate. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 16;

(i) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category I shall be reduced to 20 per cent in 6 equal, annual stages from year 1 to year 6. From January 1 of year 7 until December 31 of year 15, export duties, taxes or other charges on such goods shall not exceed 20 per cent. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods after January 1 of year 16;

(j) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category J shall be reduced to 10 per cent in eleven equal, annual stages from year 1 to year 11. From January 1 of year 12 until December 31 of year 15, export duties, taxes or other charges on such goods shall not exceed 10 per cent. Vietnam shall not apply any export duty, tax, or other charge on such goods from January 1 of year 16.

(k) Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in category K may remain in place but shall not exceed the base rate.

4. For the purposes of Section 2 to this Annex, year one means the year of entry into force of this Agreement for Vietnam. Export duties, taxes or other charges on goods provided for in the items in categories C, E, G, I, and J shall be initially reduced on the date of entry into force of the Agreement for Vietnam. Beginning in year two, each annual stage of reduction of export duties, taxes and other charges shall take effect on January 1 of the relevant year.

5. The base rate of export taxes, duties and other charges is indicated for each item in this Annex.

6. Parties that have listed goods in this Annex shall autonomously endeavour to minimize the application and level of their export duties, taxes and other charges.

SECTION 1 — MALAYSIA — SEE SECTION 1 — PAGE 2–40: https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/TPP-Final-Text-National-Treatment-and-Market-Access.pdf

ANNEX 2-D

TARIFF ELIMINATION

Section A: Tariff Elimination and Reduction

1. The base rate of customs duty and staging category for determining the interim rate of customs duty at each stage of reduction for an item are indicated for the item in each Party’s Schedule.

2. Interim staged rateshall be rounded down at least to the nearest tenth of a percentage point or, if the rate of duty is expressed in monetary units, as specified in each Party’s Tariff Schedule.

3. (a) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 4(a), when this Agreement enters into force for a Party pursuant to paragraph 1, 2, or 3 of Article 30.5 (Entry into Force):

(i) the rates of customs duties provided for in any tariff line in that Party’s Schedule in any staging category other than “EIF” shall be initially reduced on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party; and

(ii) except as otherwise provided in that Party’s Schedule, the second stage of tariff reduction shall take effect on January 1 of the following year, and each subsequent annual stage of tariff reduction shall take effect on January 1 of each subsequent year.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph 4(b)(i), when this Agreement enters into force for a Party pursuant to paragraphs 4 and 5 or Article 30.5 (Entry into Force):

(i) on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party, that Party shall implement all stages of tariff reduction that it would have implemented up to that date as if this Agreement had entered into force pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2, or 3 of Article 30.5 (Entry into Force); and

(ii) except as otherwise provided in that Party’s Schedule, the next annual stage of tariff reduction following those stages implemented pursuant to subparagraph (b)(i) shall take effect on January 1 of the year after entry into force of this Agreement for that Party, and each subsequent annual stage of tariff reduction shall take effect on January 1 of each subsequent year.

4. (a) A Party for which this Agreement has entered into force pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2, or 3 of Article 30.5 (Entry into Force) (an “original Party”) may, with respect to a Party for which the Agreement has entered into force pursuant to paragraphs 4 or 5 of Article 30.5 (a “new Party”), either:

(i) apply its Schedule to this Annex as if this Agreement had entered into force for both Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for the new Party; or

(ii) apply its Schedule to this Annex as if this Agreement had entered into force for both Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for the original Party.

(b) If the original Party applies its Schedule as if this Agreement had entered into force for both Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for the new Party pursuant to paragraph 4(a)(i), the new Party may apply its Schedule with respect to the original Party, either:

(i) as if this Agreement had entered into force for both Parties on the date of entry into force of the Agreement for the new Party; or

(ii) as if this Agreement had entered into force for both Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for the original Party.

(c) An original Party shall, no later than 12 days after the date of the affirmative determination by the Commission referred to in Article 30.5.5 (Entry into Force) for a signatory, notify that signatory and all other Parties of its election under paragraph 4(a) with respect to the signatory. A signatory shall, no later than 24 days after the date of the affirmative determination by the Commission referred to in Article 30.5.5 for that signatory, notify all Parties of its election under paragraph 4(b) with respect to each original Party that notified its election to apply its Schedule pursuant to paragraph 4(a)(i) for that signatory.

(d) An original Party that does not notify an election under subparagraph (a) as provided in subparagraph (c) shall, upon entry into force of this Agreement for the new Party, apply its Schedule to the new Party as provided in subparagraph (a)(ii). A new Party that does not notify an election under subparagraph (b) as provided in subparagraph (c) shall, upon entry into force of this Agreement for that new Party, apply its Schedule to the original Party as provided in subparagraph (b)(ii).

(e) For greater certainty:

(i) an original Party that applies its Schedule to a new Party as provided in paragraph 4(a)(i) may unilaterally accelerate the elimination of customs duties on an originating good set out in its Schedule to this Annex with respect to the new Party pursuant to Article 2.4.5 (Elimination of Customs Duties); and

(ii) a new Party that applies its Schedule to an original Party as provided in paragraph 4(b)(i) may unilaterally accelerate the elimination of customs duties on an originating good set out in its Schedule to this Annex with respect to the original Party pursuant to Article 2.4.5 (Elimination of Customs Duties).

(f) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, if on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for a new Party for which an original Party has elected to apply its schedule as provided in paragraph 4(a)(i):

(i) the original Party unilaterally accelerates the elimination of customs duties on an originating good of the new Party, the original Party shall not subsequently reverse that acceleration; and

(ii) the new Party unilaterally accelerates the elimination of customs duties on an originating good of the original Party, the new Party shall not subsequently reverse that acceleration.

5. In the event of a discrepancy in a Party’s Schedule to this Annex between the staging category specified for an item and any tariff rate specified for that item for a particular year, the Party shall apply the rate required pursuant to the staging category specified for the item.

6. For the purposes of this Annex and a Party’s Schedule:

(a) year one means:

(i) except as provided in subparagraphs (a) (ii) and (iii), the year of entry into force of this Agreement for any Party pursuant to Article 30.5.1 (Entry into Force);

(ii) in the Schedule of an original Party, with respect to goods of a new Party for which the original Party has elected to apply its Schedule as provided in paragraph 4(a)(i), the year of entry into force of this Agreement for that new Party; and

(iii) in the Schedule of a new Party, with respect to goods of an original Party for which the new Party has elected to apply its Schedule as provided in paragraph 4(b)(i), the year of entry into force of this Agreement for the new Party; but

(iv) notwithstanding subparagraphs (a)(ii) and (iii):

1) for purposes of any tariff rate quota or safeguard measure set out in the Schedule of a Party and applicable to originating goods of all Parties, year one means the year this Agreement enters into force for any Party pursuant to Article 30.5.1 (Entry into Force); and

2) for purposes of any tariff rate quota or safeguard measure set out in the Schedule of a Party and applicable to originating goods of more than one Party, but not all Parties, year one shall have the meaning set forth in the Schedule of that Party.

(b) year two means the year after year one; year three means the year after year two, year four means the year after year three, et cetera.

(c) year means a calendar year beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31, except as otherwise provided in a Party’s Schedule.

7. For tariff lines where a safeguard is applicable as identified in a Party’s Schedule to this Annex, the modalities of the safeguard as it applies to originating goods are specified in section B to the Schedule.

Section B: Tariff Differentials

8. Except as otherwise provided for in a Party’s Schedule to this Annex if an importing Party applies different preferential tariff treatment to other Parties for the same originating good at the time a claim for preferential tariff treatment is made in accordance with the importing Party’s Schedule to this Annex, the importing Party shall apply the rate of customs duty for the originating good of the Party where the last production process, other than a minimal operation, occurred.

9. For purposes of paragraph 1, a minimal operation is:

(a) an operation to ensure the preservation of a good in good condition for purposes of transport and storage;

(b) packaging, re-packaging, breaking up of consignments or putting up a good for retail sale, including placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases or boxes;

(c) mere dilution with water or another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the good;

(d) collection of goods intended to form sets, assortments, kits or composite goods; and

(e) any combination of operations referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (d).

10. Notwithstanding paragraph 8, and any applicable rules and conditions set out in a Party’s Schedule to this Annex the importing Party shall allow an importer to make a claim for preferential tariff treatment at either:

(a) the highest rate of customs duty applicable to an originating good from any of the Parties; or

(b) the highest rate of customs duty applicable to an originating good from any Party where a production process occurred.

[1] With respect to Canada, this paragraph shall not apply to certain ships of Chapter 89 that have been repaired or altered. These ships will be treated in a manner consistent with the notes associated with the relevant tariff items in Canada’s Tariff Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination).

[2] Each Party shall eliminate customs duties on containers classified in HS 86.09 that have an internal volume of less than one cubic meter at entry into force of this Agreement for that Party as set out in that Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination).

[3] For greater certainty, nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining highway and railway safety measures of general application, or from preventing a vehicle or container from entering or exiting its territory in a location where the Party does not maintain a customs port.

[4] This paragraph shall not apply to the importation or distribution of rice and paddy in Malaysia.

[5] For greater certainty, subject to its obligations under this Agreement and the relevant WTO Agreements, a Party may require that remanufactured goods:

(a) be identified as such for distribution or sale in its territory, and

(b) meet all applicable technical requirements that apply to equivalent goods in new condition.

[6] This paragraph shall not apply to the treatment of certain remanufactured goods by Vietnam as set out in Annex 2-B (Remanufactured Goods).

[7] The obligations in this Article apply only to procedures for applying for an export license.

[8] The Merchandise Processing Fee (MPF) shall be the only fee or charge of the United States to which this paragraph shall apply. In addition, this paragraph shall not apply to any fee or charge of the United States until three years after the date of entry into force of the Agreement. Further, this paragraph shall not apply to any fee or charge of Mexico on or in connection with the importation or exportation of a non-originating good until five years after the entry into force of this Agreement for Mexico.

[9] Article 2.20 shall not apply to Brunei Darussalam until one year after the date of entry into force of the Agreement. Notwithstanding Article 2.20, Chile and Mexico shall endeavour to become participants in the Information Technology Agreement. The eventual participation of Chile and Mexico in the ITA shall be subject to the completion of their domestic legal procedures.

[10] Fish and fish products are defined as products in Chapter 3 of the Harmonized System.

[11] For greater certainty and without prejudice to any Party’s position in the WTO, this Article does not cover measures referred to in Article 10 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.

[12] For the purpose of this Article, foodstuffs include fish and fisheries products, intended for human consumption.

[13] For purposes of this Article, LLP occurrence means the inadvertent low level presence in a shipment of plants or plant products, except for a plant or plant product that is a medicine or medical product, of rDNA plant material that is authorized for use in at least one country, but not in the importing country, and if authorized for food use, a food safety assessment has been based on the Codex Guideline for the Conduct of a Food Safety Assessment of Food Derived from rDNA plants.

[14] For purposes of this paragraph, “measures” does not include penalties.

[15] For the purposes of this Section, tariff rate quotas (TRQs) means only TRQs that are established under this Agreement as set out in a Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination). For greater certainty, this Section shall not apply to TRQs set out in a Party’s Schedule to the WTO Agreement.

[16] For greater certainty, this Paragraph does not apply to conditions, limits or eligibility requirements that apply regardless of whether or not the importer utilises the TRQ when importing the good.

[17] For the purposes of this Section, “allocation mechanism” includes any system where access to the TRQ is granted on a basis other than first-come first-served.

[18] For greater certainty, nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a Party from applying a different in-quota rate of customs duty to goods from TPP Parties, as set out in the Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination), than that applied to the same goods of non-parties, under a tariff rate quota established under the WTO Agreement. Further, nothing in this paragraph requires a Party to change the in-quota quantity of any tariff rate quota established under the WTO Agreement.

[19] Such goods may include but are not limited to books, magazines, and media carrying video or music recordings.

[20] For greater certainty, this subparagraph does not apply with respect to remanufactured goods, in accordance with Article 2.12 (Remanufactured Goods).

[21] Customs Duties Order 2012 — Customs Act 1967

[22] Malaysian Rubber Board (Incorporation) Act 1996, Malaysian Rubber Board (CESS) Order 1999 and Malaysian Timber Industry Board (Incorporation) Act 1973 — Timber CESS Order 2000 [p.u.(a) 56/2000]

Annex 2-D: Tariff Commitments

Australia General Notes to Tariff ScheduleAustralia Tariff Elimination ScheduleBrunei Tariff Elimination ScheduleBrunei Tariff Elimination ScheduleCanada General Notes to Tariff ScheduleCanada Tariff Elimination ScheduleCanada Appendix A Tariff Rate QuotasCanada Appendix B Japan Canada Motor Vehicle NTMChile General Notes to Tariff ScheduleChile Tariff Elimination ScheduleJapan General Notes to Tariff ScheduleJapan Tariff Elimination ScheduleJapan Appendix A Tariff Rate QuotasJapan Appendix B 1 Agricultural Safeguard MeasuresJapan Appendix B 2 Forest Good Safeguard MeasureJapan Appendix C Tariff-DifferentialsJapan Appendix D Appendix between Japan and the United States on Motor Vehicle TradeJapan Appendix E Appendix between Japan and Canada on Motor Vehicle TradeMalaysia General Notes to Tariff-ScheduleMalaysia Tariff Elimination-ScheduleMalaysia Appendix A Tariff Rate QuotasMexico General Notes to Tariff ScheduleMexico Appendix A, B and C Tariff Rate Quotas and Tariff DifferentialsMexico Tariff Elimination ScheduleNew Zealand General Notes to Tariff ScheduleNew Zealand Tariff Elimination SchedulePeru General Notes to Tariff-SchedulePeru Tariff Elimination ScheduleSingapore General Notes to Tariff ScheduleSingapore Tariff Elimination ScheduleUS General Notes to Tariff ScheduleUS Tariff Elimination-ScheduleUS Appendix A Tariff Rate QuotasUS Appendix B Agricultural Safeguard MeasuresUS Appendix C Tariff DifferentialsUS Appendix D Motor Vehicle TradeUS Appendix E Earned Import Allowance ProgramViet-Nam General Notes to Tariff ScheduleViet-Nam Tariff Elimination ScheduleViet-Nam Appendix A Tariff Rate Quotas


*************** Chapter 3 ***************

--- Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/a5957e12ed26)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures chapter creates rules of origin defining what it means for a product to be originating from TPP partner countries and thereby eligible for TPP benefits. It also creates the mechanisms for enforcing these rules. Together, this makes sure the agreement’s benefits go to TPP Parties that are taking on the Agreement’s high-standard, ambitious obligations. TPP’s strong rules of origin will help remove incentives for U.S. companies to move production abroad and encourage them to keep high-paying jobs in the United States.

Defining “TPP originating”

The Rules of Origin chapter creates a fundamental commitment that only “originating goods” — that is, goods genuinely produced in TPP countries — will receive the lower tariffs of the TPP. A good cannot be produced in countries outside the TPP and be considered TPP originating These rules are specific to each product, defining the operations it must undergo in order to be considered a TPP good and receive TPP benefits.

Originating goods

The Rules of Origin chapter will have three ways to define how something is “made in the TPP”:

Wholly Obtained or Produced GoodsThe Rules of Origin chapter defines goods grown, harvested or fished in TPP countries as TPP originating and eligible to receive lower tariffs. These rules allow farmers to get TPP benefits for their produce or crops grown in TPP countries, or for fish caught on TPP vessels.Goods Produced Exclusively from TPP MaterialsThe Rules of Origin chapter defines goods produced exclusively from originating materials and that otherwise meet the TPP rules of origin as eligible to receive lower tariffs.Product Specific RulesThe Rules of Origin chapter allows many goods to be considered TPP originating if they meet the agreement’s product-specific rules limiting the type or amount of non-TPP materials that can be used or if such materials have been substantially transformed into a “TPP product.” For example, chemical products often result from complex production processes that transform simple inputs into new or different products. These rules ensure that only businesses that make significant investments and source significant amounts of materials and components in the United States and other TPP countries are eligible to receive lower duties.

Cumulation

The Rules of Origin chapter allows TPP countries to treat materials from one TPP country in the same way they treat materials from any other TPP country when these materials are used to make a TPP good. This concept, called “cumulation,” strengthens incentives for TPP businesses to integrate production and supply chains within the TPP region, making it more attractive to do business with producers in the United States and other TPP countries than with producers in other countries.

Remanufactured goods

Remanufacturing has important benefits, including supporting U.S. jobs and reducing stress on the environment. Recognizing these benefits, the Rules of Origin chapter ensures that recovered materials used in the production of a remanufactured product count as TPP materials, allowing more remanufactured goods to count as TPP originating. Because remanufacturing is a complex, high-value, and labor-intensive production process, these commitments reduce the need for companies to import materials and components from outside the TPP region and incentivize domestic production, benefitting U.S. and other TPP workers.

Transit and transshipment

With TPP countries located across the Asia-Pacific, manufacturers in all TPP countries have to be able to transport their goods across oceans to get goods to consumers. The Rules of Origin chapter ensures that TPP goods do not lose preferential tariffs simply because of the routes they transit to reach consumers. At the same time, to prevent circumvention of the TPP rules, the chapter imposes strict limits on the production processes that can be conducted while in transit outside the TPP region in order for a product to still be eligible for TPP tariff preferences.

Origin procedures

TPP countries work in different ways with importers, exporters, and producers. Some companies can adapt to these differences, but others — particularly smaller firms or new traders — often find them difficult, complicated, and burdensome to deal with across countries. To make sure our businesses — especially small and medium-sized businesses — can easily operate across the TPP region, the Rules of Origin chapter creates a common TPP-wide system of showing and verifying that goods made in the TPP meet the rules of origin. This enables all traders to make a claim for preferential treatment, provided they have the ability and documentation to support that claim. In addition, the chapter provides customs authorities with the tools they need to verify claims in the manner they deem most appropriate, allowing them to make information requests to the importer, exporter, or producer, or to requests visits to exporter or producer facilities.

Adaptation to Future Changes in Technology and Supply Chains

Recognizing that production processes and the nature of supply chains change over time, the Rules of Origin chapter commits TPP Parties to meet regularly to consider improvements to the administration of the rules of origin.

New Features

TPP’s expanded commitments on cumulation are an important innovation designed to help promote production and supply chains among the United States and other TPP countries, and to reduce incentives to shift production to producers outside the region. TPP also includes more detailed provisions than any previous U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) for importers to make claims for preferential tariff treatment and for customs authorities to verify claims of preferential treatment. This enhancement will better inform U.S. exporters on what to expect during a verification, how to prove compliance, and how to respond if goods are denied preferential treatment.

Impact

Rules of origin define what it means for a product to be considered TPP originating and therefore to be eligible for duty-free treatment under the agreement. Together with the enforcement provisions, this makes sure the 15 agreement’s benefits go to TPP countries that are taking on the agreement’s high-standard, ambitious obligations, rather than to non-TPP countries.

The Rules of Origin chapter also incentivizes investment in TPP economies by providing simple, clear rules for claiming preferential treatment. The many previous FTAs among countries in the world’s busiest trading region each have their own rules. This created a so-called “spaghetti bowl” of rules of origin with no coherence. This in turn often makes it difficult for traders to take advantage of these agreements’ benefits, especially as goods often undergo production in multiple countries that are party to different, unconnected FTAs.

As TPP helps to develop a single, integrated Asia-Pacific market, with one, common set of rules of origin, U.S. companies that might otherwise have relocated to Asia in order to connect to Asia-Pacific production and supply chains may no longer need to do so. The United States is already emerging as the production platform of choice because of our large market, low energy costs, unmatched innovation, technological strength, educated workforce, and strong investment climate. If both TPP and T-TIP are concluded and passed by Congress, alongside our current FTAs, the U.S. would have free trade access to nearly two-thirds of the global economy. The TPP links our businesses and workers directly into these production and supply networks, providing opportunities to further increase U.S. exports and support U.S. jobs.

Section A: Rules of Origin

Article 3.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants from seed stock such as eggs, fry, fingerlings or larvae, by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to enhance production such as regular stocking, feeding or protection from predators;

fungible goods or materials means goods or materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles means those principles recognised by consensus or with substantial authoritative support in the territory of a Party with respect to the recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities; the disclosure of information; and the preparation of financial statements. These principles may encompass broad guidelines for general application, as well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;

good means any merchandise, product, article or material;

indirect material means a material used in the production, testing or inspection of a good but not physically incorporated into the good; or a material used in the maintenance of buildings or the operation of equipment, associated with the production of a good, including:

(a) fuel, energy, catalysts and solvents;

(b) equipment, devices and supplies used to test or inspect the good;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;

(d) tools, dies and moulds;

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

(f) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in production or used to operate equipment and buildings; and

(g) any other material that is not incorporated into the good but the use of which in the production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part of that production.

material means a good that is used in the production of another good;

non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or material that does not qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

originating good or originating material means a good or material that qualifies as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

packing materials and containers for shipment means goods used to protect another good during its transportation, but does not include the packaging materials or containers in which a good is packaged for retail sale;

producer means a person who engages in the production of a good; and

production means operations including growing, cultivating, raising, mining, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting, capturing, collecting, breeding, extracting, aquaculture, gathering, manufacturing, processing or assembling a good;

transaction value means the price actually paid or payable for the good when sold for export or other value determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement; and

value of the good means the transaction value of the good excluding any costs incurred in the international shipment of the good.

Article 3.2: Originating Goods

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each Party shall provide that a good is originating if it is:

(a) wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties as established in Article 3.3 (Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods);

(b) produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties, exclusively from originating materials; or

(c) produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties using non-originating materials provided the good satisfies all applicable requirements of Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin),

and the good satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Article 3.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

Each Party shall provide that for the purposes of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods), a good is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties if it is:

(a) a plant or plant good, grown, cultivated, harvested, picked or gathered there;

(b) a live animal born and raised there;

(c) a good obtained from a live animal there;

(d) an animal obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering or capturing there;

(e) a good obtained from aquaculture there;

(f) a mineral or other naturally occurring substance, not included in subparagraphs (a) through (e), extracted or taken from there;

(g) fish, shellfish and other marine life taken from the sea, seabed or subsoil outside the territories of the Parties and, in accordance with international law, outside the territorial sea of non-Parties[1] by vessels that are registered, listed or recorded with a Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

(h) a good produced from goods referred to in subparagraph (g) on board a factory ship that is registered, listed or recorded with a Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

(i) a good other than fish, shellfish and other marine life taken by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside the territories of the Parties, and beyond areas over which non-Parties exercise jurisdiction provided that Party or person of that Party has the right to exploit that seabed or subsoil in accordance with international law;

(j) a good that is:

(i) waste or scrap derived from production there; or

(ii) waste or scrap derived from used goods collected there, provided that those goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials; and

(k) a good produced there, exclusively from goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (j), or from their derivatives.

Article 3.4: Treatment of Recovered Materials Used in Production of a Remanufactured Good

1. Each Party shall provide that a recovered material derived in the territory of one or more of the Parties is treated as originating when it is used in the production of, and incorporated into, a remanufactured good.

2. For greater certainty:

(a) a remanufactured good is originating only if it satisfies the applicable requirements of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods); and

(b) a recovered material that is not used or incorporated in the production of a remanufactured good is originating only if it satisfies the applicable requirements of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods).

Article 3.5: Regional Value Content

1. Each Party shall provide that a regional value content requirement specified in this Chapter, including related Annexes, to determine whether a good is originating, is calculated as follows:

a) Focused Value Method: Based on the Value of Specified Non-Originating Materials

RVC = Value of the Good — FVNM x 100

Value of the Good

b) Build-down Method: Based on Value of Non-Originating Materials

RVC = Value of the Good — VNM x 100

Value of the Good

c) Build-up Method: Based on Value of Originating Materials

RVC = VOM x 100

Value of the Good

or

d) Net Cost Method (for Automotive Goods Only)

RVC = NC ‑ VNM x 100

NC

where:

RVC is the regional value content of a good, expressed as a percentage;

VNM is the value of non-originating materials, including materials of undetermined origin, used in the production of the good;

NC is the net cost of the good determined in accordance with Article 3.9 (Net Cost);

FVNM is the value of non-originating materials, including materials of undetermined origin, specified in the applicable product-specific-rule (PSR) in Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin) and used in the production of the good. For greater certainty, non-originating materials that are not specified in the applicable PSR in Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin) are not taken into account for the purpose of determining FVNM; and

VOM is the value of originating materials used in the production of the good in the territory of one or more of the Parties.

2. Each Party shall provide that all costs considered for the calculation of regional value content are recorded and maintained in conformity with the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles applicable in the territory of a Party where the good is produced.

Article 3.6: Materials Used in Production

1. Each Party shall provide that if a non-originating material undergoes further production such that it satisfies the requirements of this Chapter, the material is treated as originating when determining the originating status of the subsequently produced good, regardless of whether that material was produced by the producer of the good.

2. Each Party shall provide that if a non-originating material is used in the production of a good, the following may be counted as originating content for the purpose of determining whether the good meets a regional value content requirement:

(a) the value of processing of the non-originating materials undertaken in the territory of one or more of the Parties; and

(b) the value of any originating material used in the production of the non-originating material undertaken in the territory of one or more of the Parties.

Article 3.7: Value of Materials Used in Production

Each Party shall provide that for the purposes of this Chapter, the value of a material is:

(a) for a material imported by the producer of the good, the transaction value of the material at the time of importation, including the costs incurred in the international shipment of the good;

(b) for a material acquired in the territory where the good is produced:

(i) the price paid or payable by the producer in the Party where the producer is located;

(ii) the value as determined for an imported material in subparagraph (a); or

(iii) the earliest ascertainable price paid or payable in the territory of the Party; or

(c) for a material that is self-produced:

(i) all the costs incurred in the production of the material, which includes general expenses; and

(ii) an amount equivalent to the profit added in the normal course of trade, or equal to the profit that is usually reflected in the sale of goods of the same class or kind as the self-produced material that is being valued.

Article 3.8: Further Adjustments to the Value of Materials

1. Each Party shall provide that for an originating material, the following expenses may be added to the value of the material, if not included under Article 3.7 (Value of Materials Used in Production):

(a) the costs of freight, insurance, packing and all other costs incurred to transport the material to the location of the producer of the good;

(b) duties, taxes and customs brokerage fees on the material, paid in the territory of one or more of the Parties, other than duties and taxes that are waived, refunded, refundable or otherwise recoverable, which include credit against duty or tax paid or payable; and

(c) the cost of waste and spoilage resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less the value of reusable scrap or by-product.

2. Each Party shall provide that, for a non-originating material or material of undetermined origin, the following expenses may be deducted from the value of the material:

(a) the costs of freight, insurance, packing and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the location of the producer of the good;

(b) duties, taxes and customs brokerage fees on the material paid in the territory of one or more of the Parties, other than duties and taxes that are waived, refunded, refundable or otherwise recoverable, which include credit against duty or tax paid or payable; and

(c) the cost of waste and spoilage resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less the value of reusable scrap or by-product.

3. If the cost or expense listed in paragraph 1 or 2 is unknown or documentary evidence of the amount of the adjustment is not available, then no adjustment is allowed for that particular cost.

Article 3.9: Net Cost

1. If Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin) specifies a regional value content requirement to determine whether an automotive good of subheading 8407.31 through 8407.34, 8408.20, heading 84.09, heading 87.01 through 87.08 or heading 87.11 is originating, each Party shall provide that the requirement to determine origin of that good based on the Net Cost Method is calculated as set out under Article 3.5 (Regional Value Content).

2. For the purposes of this Article:

(a) net cost means total cost minus sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs, royalties, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest costs that are included in the total cost; and

(b) net cost of the good means the net cost that can be reasonably allocated to the good, using one of the following methods:

(i) calculating the total cost incurred with respect to all automotive goods produced by that producer, subtracting any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs, royalties, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest costs that are included in the total cost of all those goods, and then reasonably allocating the resulting net cost of those goods to the good;

(ii) calculating the total cost incurred with respect to all automotive goods produced by that producer, reasonably allocating the total cost to the good, and then subtracting any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs; royalties, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest costs that are included in the portion of the total cost allocated to the good; or

(iii) reasonably allocating each cost that forms part of the total cost incurred with respect to the good, so that the aggregate of these costs does not include any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs, royalties, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest costs, provided that the allocation of all those costs is consistent with the provisions regarding the reasonable allocation of costs set out in Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.

3. Each Party shall provide that, for the purposes of the Net Cost Method for motor vehicles of heading 87.01 through 87.06 or heading 87.11, the calculation may be averaged over the producer’s fiscal year using any one of the following categories, on the basis of all motor vehicles in the category or only those motor vehicles in the category that are exported to the territory of another Party:

(a) the same model line of motor vehicles in the same class of motor vehicles produced in the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(b) the same class of motor vehicles produced in the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(c) the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party; or

(d) any other category as the Parties may decide.

4. Each Party shall provide that, for the purposes of the Net Cost Method in paragraphs 1 and 2, for automotive materials of subheading 8407.31 through 8407.34, 8408.20, heading 84.09, 87.06, 87.07, or 87.08, produced in the same plant, a calculation may be averaged:

(a) over the fiscal year of the motor vehicle producer to whom the good is sold;

(b) over any quarter or month; or

(c) over the fiscal year of the producer of the automotive material,

provided that the good was produced during the fiscal year, quarter or month forming the basis for the calculation, in which:

(i) the average in subparagraph (a) is calculated separately for those goods sold to one or more motor vehicle producers; or

(ii) the average in subparagraph (a) or (b) is calculated separately for those goods that are exported to the territory of another Party.

5. For the purposes of this Article:

(a) class of motor vehicles means any one of the following categories of motor vehicles:

(i) motor vehicles classified under subheading 8701.20, motor vehicles for the transport of 16 or more persons classified under subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, and motor vehicles classified under subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90, or heading 87.05 or 87.06;

(ii) motor vehicles classified under subheading 8701.10 or subheadings 8701.30 through 8701.90;

(iii) motor vehicles for the transport of 15 or fewer persons classified under subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, and motor vehicles classified under subheading 8704.21 or 8704.31;

(iv) motor vehicles classified under subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90; or

(v) motor vehicles classified under heading 87.11.

(b) model line of motor vehicles means a group of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;

(c) non-allowable interest costs means interest costs incurred by a producer that exceed 700 basis points above the yield on debt obligations of comparable maturities issued by the central level of government of the Party in which the producer is located;

(d) reasonably allocate means to apportion in a manner appropriate under Generally Accepted Accounting Principles;

(e) royalty means payments of any kind, including payments under technical assistance or similar agreements, made as consideration for the use or right to use any copyright; literary, artistic or scientific work; patent; trademark; design; model; plan; secret formula or process, excluding those payments under technical assistance or similar agreements that can be related to specific services such as:

(i) personnel training, without regard to where that training is performed; or

(ii) engineering, tooling, die-setting, software design and similar computer services, or other services, if performed in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(f) sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs means the following costs related to sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service:

(i) sales and marketing promotion; media advertising; advertising and market research; promotional and demonstration materials; exhibits; sales conferences, trade shows and conventions; banners; marketing displays; free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service literature (good brochures, catalogues, technical literature, price lists, service manuals and sales aid information); establishment and protection of logos and trademarks; sponsorships; wholesale and retail restocking charges; and entertainment;

(ii) sales and marketing incentives; consumer, retailer or wholesaler rebates; and merchandise incentives;

(iii) salaries and wages; sales commissions; bonuses; benefits (for example, medical, insurance or pension benefits); travelling and living expenses; and membership and professional fees for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel;

(iv) recruiting and training of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel and after-sales training of customers’ employees, if those costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service of goods on the financial statements or cost accounts of the producer;

(v) liability insurance for goods;

(vi) office supplies for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service of goods, if those costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service of goods on the financial statements or cost accounts of the producer;

(vii) telephone, mail and other communications, if those costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service of goods on the financial statements or cost accounts of the producer;

(viii) rent and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service offices and distribution centres;

(ix) property insurance premiums, taxes, cost of utilities, and repair and maintenance of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service offices and distribution centres, if those costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service of goods on the financial statements or cost accounts of the producer; and

(x) payments by the producer to other persons for warranty repairs;

(g) shipping and packing costs means the costs incurred to pack a good for shipment and to ship the good from the point of direct shipment to the buyer, excluding costs to prepare and package the good for retail sale; and

(h) total cost means all product costs, period costs and other costs for a good incurred in the territory of one or more of the Parties, where:

(i) product costs are costs that are associated with the production of a good and include the value of materials, direct labour costs and direct overhead;

(ii) period costs are costs, other than product costs, that are expensed in the period in which they are incurred, such as selling expenses and general and administrative expenses; and

(iii) other costs are all costs recorded on the books of the producer that are not product costs or period costs, such as interest.

Total cost does not include profits that are earned by the producer, regardless of whether they are retained by the producer or paid out to other persons as dividends, or taxes paid on those profits, including capital gains taxes.

Article 3.10: Accumulation

1. Each Party shall provide that a good is originating if the good is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties by one or more producers, provided that the good satisfies the requirements in Article 3.2 (Originating Goods) and all other applicable requirements in this Chapter.

2. Each Party shall provide that an originating good or material of one or more of the Parties that is used in the production of another good in the territory of another Party is considered as originating in the territory of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall provide that production undertaken on a non-originating material in the territory of one or more of the Parties by one or more producers may contribute toward the originating content of a good for the purpose of determining its origin, regardless of whether that production was sufficient to confer originating status to the material itself.

Article 3.11: De Minimis

1. Except as provided in Annex 3-C (Exceptions to Article 3.11 (De Minimis)), each Party shall provide that a good that contains non-originating materials that do not satisfy the applicable change in tariff classification requirement specified in Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin) for the good is nonetheless an originating good if the value of all these materials does not exceed 10 per cent of the value of the good, as defined under Article 3.1 (Definitions), and the good meets all the other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

2. Paragraph 1 applies only when using a non-originating material in the production of another good.

3. If a good described in paragraph 1 is also subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials shall be included in the value of non-originating materials for the applicable regional value content requirement.

4. With respect to a textile or apparel good, Article 4.2 (Rules of Origin and Related Matters) applies in place of paragraph 1.

Article 3.12: Fungible Goods or Materials

Each Party shall provide that a fungible good or material is treated as originating based on the:

(a) physical segregation of each fungible good or material; or

(b) use of any inventory management method recognised in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles if the fungible good or material is commingled, provided that the inventory management method selected is used throughout the fiscal year of the person that selected the inventory management method.

Article 3.13: Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools and Instructional or Other Information Materials

1. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) in determining whether a good is wholly obtained, or satisfies a process or change in tariff classification requirement as set out in Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin), accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional or other information materials, as described in paragraph 3, are to be disregarded; or

(b) in determining whether a good meets a regional value content requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional or other information materials, as described in paragraph 3, are to be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, in calculating the regional value content of the good.

2. Each Party shall provide that a good’s accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional or other information materials, as described in paragraph 3, have the originating status of the good with which they are delivered.

3. For the purposes of this Article, accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information materials are covered when:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials are classified with, delivered with but not invoiced separately from the good; and

(b) the types, quantities, and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials are customary for that good.

Article 3.14: Packaging Materials and Containers for Retail Sale

1. Each Party shall provide that packaging materials and containers in which a good is packaged for retail sale, if classified with the good, are disregarded in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the production of the good have satisfied the applicable process or change in tariff classification requirement set out in Annex 3-D (Product-Specific Rules of Origin) or whether the good is wholly obtained or produced.

2. Each Party shall provide that if a good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the packaging materials and containers in which the good is packaged for retail sale, if classified with the good, are taken into account as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, in calculating the regional value content of the good.

Article 3.15: Packing Materials and Containers for Shipment

Each Party shall provide that packing materials and containers for shipment are disregarded in determining whether a good is originating.

Article 3.16: Indirect materials

Each Party shall provide that an indirect material is considered to be originating without regard to where it is produced.

Article 3.17: Sets of Goods

1. Each Party shall provide that for a set classified as a result of the application of Rule 3(a) or (b) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the originating status of the set shall be determined in accordance with the product-specific rule of origin that applies to the set.

2. Each Party shall provide that for a set classified as a result of the application of rule 3(c) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the set is originating only if each good in the set is originating and both the set and the goods meet the other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, for a set classified as a result of the application of rule 3(c) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the set is originating if the value of all the non-originating goods in the set does not exceed 10 per cent of the value of the set.

4. For the purposes of Paragraph 3, the value of the non-originating goods in the set and the value of the set shall be calculated in the same manner as the value of non-originating materials and the value of the good.

Article 3.18: Transit and Transhipment

1. Each Party shall provide that an originating good retains its originating status if the good has been transported to the importing Party without passing through the territory of a non-Party.

2. Each Party shall provide that if an originating good is transported through the territory of one or more non-Parties, the good retains its originating status provided that the good:

(a) does not undergo any operation outside the territories of the Parties other than: unloading; reloading; separation from a bulk shipment; storing; labelling or marking required by the importing Party; or any other operation necessary to preserve it in good condition or to transport the good to the territory of the importing Party; and

(b) remains under the control of the customs administration in the territory of a non-Party.

Section B: Origin Procedures

Article 3.19: Application of Origin Procedures

Except as otherwise provided in Annex 3-A (Other Arrangements), each Party shall apply the procedures in this Section.

Article 3.20: Claims for Preferential Treatment

1. Except as otherwise provided in Annex 3-A (Other Arrangements), each Party shall provide that an importer may make a claim for preferential tariff treatment, based on a certification of origin completed by the exporter, producer or importer[2] [3].

2. An importing Party may:

(a) require that an importer who completes a certification of origin provide documents or other information to support the certification;

(b) establish in its law conditions that an importer shall meet to complete a certification of origin;

(c) if an importer fails to meet or no longer meets the conditions established under subparagraph (b), prohibit that importer from providing its own certification as the basis of a claim for preferential tariff treatment; or

(d) if a claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on a certification of origin completed by an importer, prohibit that importer from making a subsequent claim for preferential tariff treatment for the same importation based on a certification of origin completed by the exporter or producer.

3. Each Party shall provide that a certification of origin:

(a) need not follow a prescribed format;

(b) be in writing, including electronic format;

(c) specifies that the good is both originating and meets the requirements of this Chapter; and

(d) contains a set of minimum data requirements as set out in Annex 3-B (Minimum Data Requirements).

4. Each Party shall provide that a certification of origin may apply to:

(a) a single shipment of a good into the territory of a Party; or

(b) multiple shipments of identical goods within any period specified in the certification of origin, but not exceeding 12 months.

5. Each Party shall provide that a certification of origin is valid for one year after the date that it was issued or for such longer period specified by the laws and regulations of the importing Party.

6. Each Party shall allow an importer to submit a certification of origin in English. If the certification of origin is not in English, the importing Party may require the importer to submit a translation in the language of the importing Party.

Article 3.21: Basis of a Certification of Origin

1. Each Party shall provide that if a producer certifies the origin of a good, the certification of origin is completed on the basis of the producer having information that the good is originating.

2. Each Party shall provide that if the exporter is not the producer of the good, a certification of origin may be completed by the exporter of the good on the basis of:

(a) the exporter having information that the good is originating; or

(b) reasonable reliance on the producer’s information that the good is originating.

3. Each Party shall provide that a certification of origin may be completed by the importer of the good on the basis of:

(a) the importer having documentation that the good is originating; or

(b) reasonable reliance on supporting documentation provided by the exporter or producer that the good is originating.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 or 2 shall be construed to allow a Party to require an exporter or producer to complete a certification of origin or provide a certification of origin to another person.

Article 3.22: Discrepancies

Each Party shall provide that it shall not reject a certification of origin due to minor errors or discrepancies in the certification of origin.

Article 3.23: Waiver of Certification of Origin

1. No Party shall require a certification of origin if:

(a) the customs value of the importation does not exceed US $1000 or the equivalent amount in the importing Party’s currency or any higher amount as the importing Party may establish; or

(b) it is a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement or does not require the importer to present a certification of origin,

provided that the importation does not form part of a series of importations carried out or planned for the purpose of evading compliance with the importing Party’s laws governing claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement.

Article 3.24: Obligations Relating to Importation

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, each Party shall provide that, for the purpose of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the importer shall:

(a) make a declaration[4] that the good qualifies as an originating good;

(b) have a valid certification of origin in its possession at the time the declaration referred to in subparagraph (a) is made;

(c) provide a copy of the certification of origin to the importing Party if required by the Party; and

(d) if required by a Party to demonstrate that the requirements in Article 3.18 (Transit and Transhipment) have been satisfied, provide relevant documents, such as transport documents, and in the case of storage, storage or customs documents.

2. Each Party shall provide that, if the importer has reason to believe that the certification of origin is based on incorrect information that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certification of origin, the importer shall correct the importation document and pay any customs duty and, if applicable, penalties owed.

3. No importing Party shall subject an importer to a penalty for making an invalid claim for preferential tariff treatment if the importer, on becoming aware that such a claim is not valid and prior to discovery of the error by that Party, voluntarily corrects the claim and pays any applicable customs duty under the circumstances provided for in the Party’s law.

Article 3.25: Obligations Relating to Exportation

1. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer in its territory that completes a certification of origin shall submit a copy of that certification of origin to the exporting Party, on its request.

2. Each Party may provide that a false certification of origin or other false information provided by an exporter or a producer in its territory to support a claim that a good exported to the territory of another Party is originating has the same legal consequences, with appropriate modifications, as those that would apply to an importer in its territory that makes a false statement or representation in connection with an importation.

3. Each Party shall provide that if an exporter or a producer in its territory has provided a certification of origin and has reason to believe that it contains or is based on incorrect information, the exporter or producer shall promptly notify, in writing, every person and every Party to whom the exporter or producer provided the certification of origin of any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certification of origin.

Article 3.26: Record Keeping Requirements

1. Each Party shall provide that an importer claiming preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into the territory of that Party shall maintain, for a period of no less than five years from the date of importation of the good:

(a) the documentation related to the importation, including the certification of origin that served as the basis for the claim; and

(b) all records necessary to demonstrate that the good is originating and qualified for preferential tariff treatment, if the claim was based on a certification of origin completed by the importer.

2. Each Party shall provide that a producer or exporter in its territory that provides a certification of origin shall maintain, for a period of no less than five years from the date the certification of origin was issued, all records necessary to demonstrate that a good for which the exporter or producer provided a certification of origin is originating. Each Party shall endeavour to make available information on types of records that may be used to demonstrate that a good is originating.

3. Each Party shall provide that an importer, exporter or producer in its territory may choose to maintain the records specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 in any medium that allows for prompt retrieval, including electronic, optical, magnetic or written form in accordance with that Party’s law.

Article 3.27: Verification of Origin

1. For the purpose of determining whether a good imported into its territory is originating, the importing Party may conduct a verification of any claim for preferential tariff treatment by one or more of the following[5]:

(a) a written request for information from the importer of the good;

(b) a written request for information from the exporter or producer of the good;

(c) a verification visit to the premises of the exporter or producer of the good;

(d) for a textile or apparel good, the procedures set out in Article 4.6 (Verification); or

(e) other procedures as may be decided by the importing Party and the Party where an exporter or producer of the good is located.

2. If an importing Party conducts a verification, it shall accept information directly from the importer, exporter or producer.

3. If a claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on a certification of origin completed by the exporter or producer and, in response to a request for information by an importing Party under paragraph 1(a), the importer does not provide information to the importing Party or the information provided is not sufficient to support a claim for preferential tariff treatment, the importing Party shall request information from the exporter or producer, under paragraph 1(b) or 1(c) before it may deny the claim for preferential tariff treatment. The importing Party shall complete the verification, including any additional request to the exporter or producer under paragraph 1(b) or 1(c), within the time provided in paragraph 6(e).[6]

4. A written request for information or for a verification visit under paragraphs 1(a) through 1(c) shall:

(a) be in English or in an official language of the Party of the person to whom the request is made;

(b) include the identity of the government authority issuing the request;

(c) state the reason for the request, including the specific issue the requesting Party seeks to resolve with the verification;

(d) include sufficient information to identify the good that is being verified;

(e) include a copy of relevant information submitted with the good, including the certification of origin; and

(f) in the case of a verification visit, request the written consent of the exporter or producer whose premises are going to be visited, and state the proposed date and location for the visit and its specific purpose.

5. If an importing Party has initiated a verification in accordance with paragraph 1(b) or 1(c), it shall inform the importer of the initiation of the verification.

6. For a verification under paragraphs 1(a) through 1(c), the importing Party shall:

(a) ensure that a written request for information, or for documentation to be reviewed during a verification visit, is limited to information and documentation to determine whether the good is originating;

(b) describe the information or documentation in sufficient detail to allow the importer, exporter or producer to identify the information and documentation necessary to respond;

(c) allow the importer, exporter or producer at least 30 days from the date of receipt of the written request for information under paragraph 1(a) or 1(b) to respond;

(d) allow the exporter or producer 30 days from the date of receipt of the written request for a visit under paragraph 1(c) to consent or refuse the request; and

(e) make a determination following a verification as expeditiously as possible and no later than 90 days after it receives the information necessary to make the determination, including, if applicable, any information received under paragraph 9, and no later than 365 days after the first request for information or other action under paragraph 1. If permitted by its law, a Party may extend the 365 day period in exceptional cases, such as where the technical information concerned is very complex.

7. If an importing Party makes a verification request under paragraph 1(b), it shall, on request of the Party where the exporter or producer is located and in accordance with the importing Party’s laws and regulations, inform that Party. The Parties concerned shall decide the manner and timing of informing the Party where the exporter or producer is located of the verification request. In addition, on request of the importing Party, the Party where the exporter or producer is located may, as it deems appropriate and in accordance with its laws and regulations, assist with the verification. This assistance may include providing a contact point for the verification, collecting information from the exporter or producer on behalf of the importing Party, or other activities in order that the importing Party may make a determination as to whether the good is originating. The importing Party shall not deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment solely on the ground that the Party where the exporter or producer is located did not provide requested assistance.

8. If an importing Party initiates a verification under paragraph 1(c), it shall, at the time of the request for the visit, inform the Party where the exporter or producer is located and provide the opportunity for the officials of the Party where the exporter or producer is located to accompany them during the visit.

9. Prior to issuing a written determination, the importing Party shall inform the importer and any exporter or producer that provided information directly to the importing Party, of the results of the verification and, if the importing Party intends to deny preferential tariff treatment, provide those persons a period of at least 30 days for the submission of additional information relating to the origin of the good.

10. The importing Party shall:

(a) provide the importer with a written determination of whether the good is originating that includes the basis for the determination; and

(b) provide the importer, exporter or producer that provided information during the verification or certified that the good was originating with the results of the verification and the reasons for that result.

11. During verification, the importing Party shall allow the release of the good, subject to payment of duties or provision of security as provided for in its law. If as a result of the verification the importing Party determines that the good is an originating good, it shall grant preferential tariff treatment to the good and refund any excess duties paid or release any security provided, unless the security also covers other obligations.

12. If verifications of identical goods by a Party indicate a pattern of conduct by an importer, exporter or producer of false or unsupported representations relevant to a claim that a good imported into its territory qualifies as an originating good, the Party may withhold preferential tariff treatment to identical goods imported, exported or produced by that person until that person demonstrates that the identical goods qualify as originating. For the purposes of this paragraph, “identical goods” means goods that are the same in all respects relevant to the particular rule of origin that qualifies the goods as originating.

13. For the purpose of a verification request, it is sufficient for a Party to rely on the contact information of an exporter, producer or importer in a Party provided in a certification of origin.

Article 3.28: Determinations on Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 2 or Article 4.7 (Determinations), each Party shall grant a claim for preferential tariff treatment made in accordance with this Chapter for a good that arrives in its territory on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party. In addition, if permitted by the importing Party, the importing Party shall grant a claim for preferential tariff treatment made in accordance with this Chapter for a good which is imported into its territory or released from customs control on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

2. The importing Party may deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment if:

(a) it determines that the good does not qualify for preferential treatment;

(b) pursuant to a verification under Article 3.27 (Verification of Origin), it has not received sufficient information to determine that the good qualifies as originating;

(c) the exporter, producer or importer fails to respond to a written request for information in accordance with Article 3.27 (Verification of Origin);

(d) after receipt of a written notification for a verification visit, the exporter or producer does not provide its written consent in accordance with Article 3.27 (Verification of Origin); or

(e) the importer, exporter or producer fails to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.

3. If an importing Party denies a claim for preferential tariff treatment, it shall issue a determination to the importer that includes the reasons for the determination.

4. A Party shall not reject a claim for preferential tariff treatment for the sole reason that the invoice was issued in a non-Party. If an invoice is issued in a non-Party, a Party shall require that the certification of origin be separate from the invoice.

Article 3.29: Refunds and Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment after Importation

1. Each Party shall provide that an importer may apply for preferential tariff treatment and a refund of any excess duties paid for a good if the importer did not make a claim for preferential tariff treatment at the time of importation, provided that the good would have qualified for preferential tariff treatment when it was imported into the territory of the Party.

2. As a condition for preferential tariff treatment under paragraph 1, the importing Party may require that the importer:

(a) make a claim for preferential tariff treatment;

(b) provide a statement that the good was originating at the time of importation;

(c) provide a copy of the certification of origin; and

(d) provide such other documentation relating to the importation of the good as the importing Party may require,

no later than one year after the date of importation or a longer period if specified in the importing Party’s law.

Article 3.30: Penalties

A Party may establish or maintain appropriate penalties for violations of its laws and regulations related to this Chapter.

Article 3.31: Confidentiality

Each Party shall maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in accordance with this Chapter and shall protect that information from disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position of the person providing the information.

Section C: Other Matters

Article 3.32: Committee on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures (Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party, to consider any matters arising under this Chapter.

2. The Committee shall consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter is administered effectively, uniformly and consistently with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement, and shall cooperate in the administration of this Chapter.

3. The Committee shall consult to discuss possible amendments or modifications to this Chapter and its Annexes, taking into account developments in technology, production processes or other related matters.

4. Prior to the entry into force of an amended version of the Harmonized System, the Committee shall consult to prepare updates to this Chapter that are necessary to reflect changes to the Harmonized System.

5. With respect to a textile or apparel good, Article 4.8 (Committee on Textile and Apparel Trade Matters) applies in place of this Article.

6. The Committee shall consult on the technical aspects of submission and the format of the electronic certification of origin.

Annex A: Other Arrangements

1. This Annex shall remain in force for a period of 12 years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement according to Article 30.5.1 (Entry Into Force).

2. A Party may apply the arrangements under paragraph 5 only if it has notified the other Parties of its intention to apply those arrangements at the time of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party. That Party (the notifying Party) may apply these arrangements for a period not exceeding five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

3. The notifying Party may extend the period under paragraph 2 for one additional period of no more than five years if it notifies the other Parties no later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the initial period.

4. In no case shall a Party apply the arrangements under paragraph 5 beyond 12 years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement according to Article 30.5.1 (Entry Into Force).

5. An exporting Party may require that a certification of origin for a good exported from its territory be either:

(a) issued by a competent authority; or

(b) completed by an approved exporter.

6. If an exporting Party applies the arrangements under paragraph 5, it shall provide the requirements for those arrangements in publically available laws or regulations, inform the other Parties at the time of the notification under paragraph 2, and inform the other Parties at least 90 days before any modification to the requirements comes into effect.

7. An importing Party may treat a certification of origin issued by a competent authority or completed by an approved exporter in the same manner as a certification of origin under Section B.

8. An importing Party may condition acceptance of a certification of origin issued by a competent authority or completed by an approved exporter on the authentication of elements such as stamps, signatures or approved exporter numbers. To facilitate that authentication, the Parties concerned shall exchange information on those elements.

9. If a claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on a certification of origin issued by a competent authority or completed by an approved exporter, the importing Party may make a verification request to the exporter or producer in accordance with Article 3.27 (Verification of Origin) or to the competent authority that issued the certification of origin.

10. If a Party makes a verification request to the competent authority, the competent authority shall respond to it in the same manner as an exporter or producer under Article 3.27 (Verification of Origin). A competent authority shall maintain records in the same manner as an exporter or producer under Article 3.26 (Record Keeping Requirements). If the competent authority that issued the certification of origin fails to respond to a verification request, the importing Party may deny the claim for preferential tariff treatment.

11. If an importing Party makes a verification request under Article 3.27.1(b) (Verification of Origin), it shall, on request of the Party where the exporter or producer is located and in accordance with the importing Party’s laws and regulations, inform that Party. The Parties concerned shall decide the manner and timing of informing the Party where the exporter or producer is located of the verification request In addition, on request of the importing Party, the competent authority of the Party where the exporter or producer is located may, as it deems appropriate and in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party where the exporter or producer is located, assist in the verification in the same manner as Article 3.27.7 (Verification of Origin).

Annex B: Minimum Data Requirements

A certification of origin that is the basis for a claim for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement shall include the following elements:

1. Importer, Exporter or Producer Certification of Origin

Indicate whether the certifier is the exporter, producer or importer in accordance with Article 3.20 (Claims for Preferential Treatment).

2. Certifier

Provide the certifier’s name, address (including country), telephone number and e-mail address.

3. Exporter

Provide the exporter’s name, address (including country), e-mail address and telephone number if different from the certifier. This information is not required if the producer is completing the certification of origin and does not know the identity of the exporter. The address of the exporter shall be the place of export of the good in a TPP country.

4. Producer

Provide the producer’s name, address (including country), e-mail address and telephone number, if different from the certifier or exporter or, if there are multiple producers, state “Various” or provide a list of producers. A person that wishes for this information to remain confidential may state “Available upon request by the importing authorities”. The address of a producer shall be the place of production of the good in a TPP country.

5. Importer

Provide, if known, the importer’s name, address, e-mail address and telephone number. The address of the importer shall be in a TPP country.

6. Description and HS Tariff Classification of the Good

(a) Provide a description of the good and the HS tariff classification of the good to the 6-digit level. The description should be sufficient to relate it to the good covered by the certification; and

(b) If the certification of origin covers a single shipment of a good, indicate, if known, the invoice number related to the exportation.

7. Origin Criterion

Specify the rule of origin under which the good qualifies.

8. Blanket Period

Include the period if the certification covers multiple shipments of identical goods for a specified period of up to 12 months as set out in paragraph 3.20.4 (Claims for Preferential Treatment).

9. Authorized Signature and Date:

The certification must be signed and dated by the certifier and accompanied by the following statement:

I certify that the goods described in this document qualify as originating and the information contained in this document is true and accurate. I assume responsibility for proving such representations and agree to maintain and present upon request or to make available during a verification visit, documentation necessary to support this certification.

Annex C: Exceptions to Article 3.11 (De Minimis)

Each Party shall provide that Article 3.11 (De Minimis) shall not apply to:

(a) non-originating materials of heading 04.01 through 04.06, or non-originating dairy preparations containing over 10 percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 1901.90 or 2106.90, used in the production of a good of heading 04.01 through 04.06 other than a good of subheading 0402.10 through 0402.29 or 0406.30[7];

(b) non-originating materials of heading 04.01 through 04.06, or non-originating dairy preparations containing over 10 percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 1901.90, used in the production of the following goods:

(i) infant preparations containing over 10 percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 1901.10;

(ii) mixes and doughs, containing over 25 percent by dry weight of butterfat, not put up for retail sale of subheading 1901.20;

(iii) dairy preparations containing over 10 percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 1901.90 or 2106.90;

(iv) goods of heading 21.05;

(v) beverages containing milk of subheading 2202.90; or

(vi) animal feeds containing over 10 percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 2309.90;

(c) non-originating materials of heading 08.05 or subheading 2009.11 through 2009.39, used in the production of a good of subheading 2009.11 through 2009.39 or a fruit or vegetable juice of any single fruit or vegetable, fortified with minerals or vitamins, concentrated or unconcentrated, of subheading 2106.90 or 2202.90;

(d) non-originating materials of Chapter 15 of the Harmonized System, used in the production of a good of headings 15.07, 15.08, 15.12, or 15.14; or

(e) non-originating peaches, pears or apricots of Chapter 8 or 20 of the Harmonized System, used in the production of a good of heading 20.08.

— — —

[1] Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice the positions of the Parties with respect to matters relating to the law of the sea.

[2] Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from requiring an importer, exporter or producer in its territory that completes a certification of origin to demonstrate that it is able to support that certification.

[3] For Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru and Viet Nam, implementation of paragraph 1 with respect to a certification of origin by the importer shall be no later than five years after their respective dates of entry into force of this Agreement.

[4] A Party shall specify its declaration requirements in its laws, regulations or procedures that are published or otherwise made available in a manner as to enable interested persons to become acquainted with them.

[5] For the purposes of this Article, the information collected in accordance with this Article shall be used for the purpose of ensuring the effective implementation of this Chapter. A Party shall not use these procedures to collect information for other purposes.

[6] For greater certainty, a Party is not required to request information from the exporter or producer to support a claim for preferential tariff treatment or complete a verification through the exporter or producer if the claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on the importer’s certification of origin.

7 For greater certainty, milk powder of subheading 0402.10 through 0402.29, and processed cheese of subheading 0406.30, that is originating as a result of the application of the 10% de minimis allowance in Article 3.11 (De Minimis), shall be an originating material when used in the production of any good of heading 0401 through 0406 as referred to in subparagraph (a) or the goods listed in subparagraph (b).


*************** Chapter 4 ***************

--- Textiles and Apparel ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/9612f6bd809e)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Textiles and Apparel chapter will create export opportunities for Made-in-America clothes, fabrics, and yarns and support jobs in the United States. This objective is advanced by a “yarn-forward” approach that requires use of yarns and fabrics from TPP countries in end products qual- 18 ifying for preferential treatment under TPP — with some flexibility so that American businesses and workers whose products depend on inputs not available within the TPP region can still benefit. The yarn-forward approach also will help to develop a regionally-integrated supply chain that will promote long-term growth and investment in this sector in the United States. The Textiles and Apparel chapter also secures close customs cooperation among TPP Parties to facilitate effective enforcement of the rules; and ensures that U.S. companies have access to temporary relief if an import surge causes, or threatens to cause, serious damage to their business.

Overview

Eliminates tariffs on textile and apparel goods

TPP will eliminate tariffs on U.S. exports of textiles and apparel to the other TPP markets, with many tariffs going to zero on day one, and others being phased out. We have reached a carefully crafted U.S. tariff elimination package with our TPP partners that takes into account the specific sensitivities of the United States.

Rules of Origin

To ensure that the benefits of TPP go to TPP workers and businesses, TPP requires a “yarn forward” rule of origin, which means that to get the lower tariffs offered in TPP, a good must be made within the free trade area using U.S. or other TPP country yarns and fabrics. At the same time, we have carefully crafted exceptions to the general rules of origin. For example, the Textiles and Apparel chapter includes a “short supply list,” which provides TPP partners with flexibilities in cases where the U.S. and other TPP members do not produce enough of a particular fabric or yarn to meet production needs. In such cases, the short supply list allows apparel using these specified materials from outside the TPP region to qualify for TPP’s reduced tariff rates. There is also a special feature for Vietnam, linking improved access to the U.S. market for cotton pants to the purchase of U.S.-made cotton fabric.

Customs Cooperation to Combat Duty Evasion and Fraud

The Textiles and Apparel chapter’s strong enforcement provisions and customs cooperation commitments enable U.S. Customs officers to work with other TPP countries to make sure that when traders claim their goods should get the lower tariffs and better treatment available under TPP, those claims are genuine. This includes authority for U.S. Customs officials to work with TPP counterparts to fight customs offenses, such as duty evasion, smuggling, and fraud.

Safeguard for Textiles and Apparel

The Textiles and Apparel chapter creates a special safeguard procedure for textiles and apparel. This provision allows us to temporarily restore higher duties on imports coming into the United States if imports from a TPP country cause or even threaten to cause serious damage to the U.S. industry. Enforcement of the TPP rules To prevent customs fraud, TPP enables our Customs officers to go directly to facilities of exporters or producers in other TPP countries to verify that the textile and apparel goods those companies send to the United States are genuine TPP goods, and to investigate whether importers are meeting our rules. These commitments include protections for U.S. exporters and producers to ensure that they have a fair chance to show their goods meet the rules and therefore qualify for the lower tariffs and better treatment available under TPP.

New Features

The Textiles and Apparel chapter includes a carefully tailored short supply list, allowing flexibility to meet the rules of origin and strengthen regional integration. Building on past agreements, TPP provides for a variety of enforcement tools tailored to the textiles sector to allow customs authorities to investigate fraud and smuggling. These tools include robust verification procedures — with a focus on direct site visits — that apply to all countries in the TPP, as well as cooperation among TPP countries. U.S. Customs and Border Protection will use these tools to make sure that everyone is playing by the rules and that only genuine TPP goods benefit from TPP.

Impact

U.S. textile and apparel industry, having weathered the forces of globalization and the financial crisis of 2008, has emerged as strong and innovative, with an orientation toward exports. The industry is a major U.S. manufacturing employer, with employment in the U.S. totaling more than 370,000 jobs on average in 2014, and the value of industry shipments rising from $48.7 billion in 2009 to $56.7 billion in 2014. U.S. textile and apparel manufacturers sold nearly $11 billion worth of products to TPP countries in 2014, an increase of around 50 percent from 2009, helping to make the U.S. the world’s fourth-largest exporter of textile products.

TPP will help increase sales of Made-in-America yarns, fabrics, and clothing to some of the fastest-growing markets in the world. The TPP region is home to hundreds of millions of consumers — from the emerging middle class in Southeast Asia to the high-end consumers of Japan. And textile and apparel industries in the TPP region require many of the high-technology textile products in which U.S. producers are most competitive, including those using composite materials and carbon fibers. TPP’s Textile and Apparels chapter will help the U.S. capitalize on these strengths, with measures including:

Eliminating tariff barriers to U.S. exports

Many Asia-Pacific economies maintain high tariffs on U.S. exports of yarns, fabrics, and apparel, ranging up to 30 percent in Japan and Malaysia.

Ensuring that TPP benefits go to genuine TPP textile and apparel products

Customs fraud — including illegal transshipment, duty evasion, and improper or misleading country-of-origin marking — is always a risk. To address this issue, U.S. Customs and Border Protection has designated textiles and apparel as a priority trade enforcement issue in order to promote legitimate trade and safeguard U.S. manufacturing jobs. Close cooperation with trading partners also is needed to help ensure strong enforcement of the trade rules in this sector.

Valuing Existing Relationships

Over 70 percent of U.S. textile exports go to our FTA partner countries. While we are looking to expand trade with new FTA partners under TPP, the TPP Textiles and Apparel chapter reflects careful consideration of U.S. business relationships with existing FTA partners given our strong interest in supporting economic activity in these countries.

Article 4.1: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

textile or apparel good means a good listed in Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin).

customs offence means any act committed for the purpose of, or having the effect of, avoiding a Party’s laws or regulations pertaining to the terms of this Agreement governing importations or exportations of textile or apparel goods amongst the Parties, specifically those that violate a customs law or regulation for restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports, duty evasion, falsification of documents relating to the importation or exportation of goods, fraud or smuggling.

transition period means the period beginning at entry into force of the Agreement between the Parties concerned until five years after the date on which the importing Party eliminates duties on that good for that exporting Party pursuant to this Agreement.

Article 4.2: Rules of Origin and Related Matters

Application of Chapter 4

1. Except as provided in this Chapter, including the Annexes thereto, Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures) applies to textile and apparel goods.

De Minimis

2. A textile or apparel good in Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin) classified outside of Chapters 61 through 63 that is not an originating good because the materials used in the production of the good that do not undergo an applicable change in tariff classification set out in Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin), shall nonetheless be considered to be an originating good if the total weight of all such materials is not more than ten percent of the total weight of the good.

3. A textile or apparel good of Chapters 61 through 63 that is not an originating good because the fibers or yarns used in the production of the component of the good that determine the tariff classification of the good that do not undergo an applicable change in tariff classification set out in Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin), shall nonetheless be considered to be an originating good if the total weight of all such fibers or yarns is not more than ten per cent of the total weight of that component.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3, a good of paragraph 2 containing elastomeric yarn or a good of paragraph 3 containing elastomeric yarn in the component of the good that determines the tariff classification of the good shall be considered to be an originating good only if such yarns are wholly formed in the territory of one or more of the Parties.[1] [2]

Treatment of Sets

5. Notwithstanding the textile and apparel specific rules of origin set out in Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin), textile and apparel goods classifiable as goods put up in sets for retail sale as provided for in Rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System shall not be regarded as originating goods unless each of the goods in the set is an originating good or the total value of the non-originating goods in the set does not exceed 10 percent of the value of the set.

6. For the purposes of paragraph 5:

a) the value of non-originating goods in the set is calculated in the same manner as the value of non-originating materials in Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures) and

b) the value of the set is calculated in the same manner as the value of the good in Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures).

Treatment of Short Supply List

7. Each Party shall provide that, for purposes of determining whether a good is originating under Chapter 3, Article 2(c), a material listed in Appendix 1 (Short Supply List) to Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin) is originating provided the material meets any requirement, including any end use requirement, specified in the Appendix 1 (Short Supply List) to Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin).

8. Where a claim that a good is originating relies on incorporation of a material on Appendix 1 (Short Supply List) to Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin), the importing Party may require in the importation documentation, such as a certification of origin, the number or description of the material on Appendix 1 (Short Supply List) to Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin).

9. Non-originating materials marked as temporary in Appendix 1 (Short Supply List) to Annex A (Textiles and Apparel Product — Specific Rules of Origin) may be considered as originating under paragraph 7 for 5 years from entry into force of this Agreement.

Treatment for Certain Handmade or Folkloric Goods

10. An importing Party may identify particular textile or apparel goods of an exporting Party to be eligible for duty-free or preferential tariff treatment that the importing and exporting Parties mutually agree fall within:

(a) hand-loomed fabrics of a cottage industry;

(b) hand-printed fabrics with a pattern created with a wax-resistance technique;

(c) hand-made cottage industry goods made of such hand-loomed or hand-printed fabrics; or

(d) traditional folklore handicraft goods

provided that any requirements agreed by the importing and exporting Parties for such treatment are met.

Article 4.3: Emergency Actions

1. Subject to the provisions of this Article if, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty provided for in this Agreement, a textile or apparel good benefiting from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement is being imported into the territory of a Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to the domestic market for that good, and under such conditions as to cause serious damage, or actual threat thereof, to a domestic industry producing a like or directly competitive good, the importing Party may, to the extent and for such time as may be necessary to prevent or remedy such damage and to facilitate adjustment, take emergency action in accordance with paragraph 6, consisting of an increase in the rate of duty on the good of the exporting Party or Parties to a level not to exceed the lesser of:

(a) the most-favoured-nation (MFN) applied rate of customs duty in effect at the time the action is taken; and

(b) the MFN applied rate of customs duty in effect on the day immediately preceding the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

2. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit a Party’s rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards, or Chapter 6 (Trade Remedies).

3. In determining serious damage, or actual threat thereof, the importing Party:

(a) shall examine the effect of increased imports from the exporting Party or Parties of a textile or apparel good benefiting from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement on the particular industry, as reflected in changes in such relevant economic variables as output, productivity, utilization of capacity, inventories, market share, exports, wages, employment, domestic prices, profits and investment, none of which either alone or combined with other factors, shall necessarily be decisive; and

(b) shall not consider changes in technology or consumer preference in the importing Party as factors supporting a determination of serious damage or actual threat thereof.

4. The importing Party may take an emergency action under this Article only following its publication of procedures ‎that identify the criteria for a finding of serious damage and only following an investigation by its competent authorities. Such an investigation must use data based on the factors described in 3(a) that serious damage or actual threat thereof is demonstrably caused by increased imports of the product concerned as a result of this Agreement.

5. The importing Party shall submit to the exporting Party or Parties, without delay, written notice of the initiation of the investigation provided for in paragraph 4, as well as of its intent to take emergency action, and, on the request of the exporting Party or Parties, shall enter into consultations with that Party or Parties regarding the matter. The importing Party shall provide the exporting party full details of the emergency action to be taken. The Parties concerned shall begin consultations without delay and, unless otherwise decided, shall complete them within 60 days of receipt of the request. After completion of the consultations, the importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of any decision. If it decides to apply a safeguard measure, the notification shall include the details of the measure, including when it will take effect.

6. The following conditions and limitations shall apply to any emergency action taken under this Article:

(a) no emergency action may be maintained for a period exceeding two years with a possible extension for an additional two years;

(b) no emergency action against a good may be taken or maintained beyond the transition period;

(c) no emergency action may be taken by an importing Party against any particular good of another Party or Parties more than once; and

(d) on termination of the emergency action, the importing Party shall accord to the good that was subject to the emergency action the tariff treatment that would have been in effect but for the action.

7. The Party taking an emergency action under this Article shall provide to the exporting Party or Parties against whose goods the measure is taken mutually agreed trade liberalizing compensation in the form of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the emergency action. Such concessions shall be limited to textile and apparel goods, unless the Parties concerned otherwise agree. If the Parties concerned are unable to agree on compensation within 60 days or a longer period agreed by the Parties concerned, the Party or Parties against whose good the emergency action is taken may take tariff action having trade effects substantially equivalent to the trade effects of the emergency action taken under this Article. Such tariff action may be taken against any goods of the Party taking the emergency action. The Party taking the tariff action shall apply the tariff action only for the minimum period necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent trade effects. The importing Party’s obligation to provide trade compensation and the exporting Party’s right to take tariff action shall terminate when the emergency action terminates.

8. A Party may not take or maintain an emergency action under this Article against a textile or apparel good that is subject, or becomes subject, to a transitional safeguard measure under Chapter 6 (Trade Remedies), or a safeguard measure that a Party takes pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994, or the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.

9. The investigations referred to in this Article shall be carried out according to procedures established by each Party. Each Party shall, upon entry into force of this Agreement or before it initiates an investigation, notify the other Parties of these procedures.

10. Each Party shall, in any year where it takes or maintains an emergency action under this Article, provide a report on such actions to the other Parties.

Article 4.4: Cooperation

1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, cooperate with other Parties for the purposes of enforcing or assisting in the enforcement of their respective measures concerning customs offences for trade in textile or apparel goods among the Parties, including ensuring the accuracy of claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall take appropriate measures, which may include legislative, administrative, judicial, or other action for:

(a) enforcement of its laws, regulations and procedures related to customs offences, and

(b) cooperation with an importing Party in the enforcement of its laws regulations and procedures related to prevention of customs offences.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, “appropriate measures” means measures a Party takes, in accordance with its laws, regulations, and procedures, such as:

(a) providing its government officials with the legal authority to meet the obligations under this Chapter;

(b) enabling its law enforcement officials to identify and address customs offences;

(c) establishing or maintaining criminal, civil or administrative penalties that are aimed at deterring customs offences;

(d) undertaking appropriate enforcement action where it believes, based on a request from another Party that includes relevant facts, that a customs offence has occurred or is occurring in the requested Party’s territory with regard to a textile or apparel good, including in free trade zones of the requested Party; and

(e) cooperating with another Party, on request, to establish facts regarding customs offences in the requested Party’s territory with regard to a textile or apparel good, including in free trade zones of the requested Party.

4. A Party may request information from another Party where it has relevant facts indicating a customs offence is occurring or is likely to occur, such as historical evidence.

5. Any request under paragraph 4 shall be made in writing, by electronic means or any other method that acknowledges receipt, and shall include a brief statement of the matter at issue, the cooperation requested, the relevant facts indicating a customs offence, and sufficient information for the requested Party to respond in accordance with its laws and regulations.

6. To enhance cooperative efforts under this Article between Parties to prevent and address customs offences, a Party that receives a request under paragraph 4 shall, subject to its laws, regulations, and procedures, including those related to confidentiality referred to in Article 9.4 provide to the requesting Party, upon receipt of a request in accordance with paragraph 5, available information on the existence of an importer, exporter, or producer, goods of an importer, exporter, or producer, or other matters related to this Chapter. The information may include any available correspondence, reports, bills of lading, invoices, order contracts, or other information regarding enforcement of laws or regulations related to the request.

7. A Party may provide information requested in this article on paper or in electronic form.

8. Each Party shall establish or maintain contact points for cooperation under this Chapter. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of its contact points upon entry into force of this Agreement and shall notify the other Parties promptly of any subsequent changes.

Article 4.5: Monitoring

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain programs or practices to identify and address textiles and apparel customs offences. This may include programs or practices to ensure the accuracy of claims for preferential tariff treatment for textile and apparel goods under this Agreement.

2. Through such programs or practices, the Party may collect or share information related to textiles or apparel goods for use for risk management purposes.

3. In addition to paragraphs 1 and 2, some Parties have bilateral agreements that apply between those Parties.

Article 4.6: Verification

1. An importing Party may conduct a verification with respect to a textile or apparel good pursuant to Article 3.27.1(a), 3.27.1(b), or 3.27.1(e) (Verification) and their associated procedures to verify whether a good qualifies for preferential tariff treatment or through a request for a site visit as described in this Article. [3]

2. An importing Party may request a site visit under this article from an exporter or producer of textile or apparel goods to verify whether:

(a) a textile or apparel good qualifies for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement; or

(b) customs offences are occurring or have occurred.

3. During a site visit under this article, an importing Party may request access to:

(a) records and facilities relevant to the claim for preferential tariff treatment; or

(b) records and facilities relevant to the customs offences being verified.

4. Where an importing Party seeks to conduct a site visit under paragraph 2, it shall notify the host Party, no later than 20 days before the visit, regarding:

(a) the proposed dates;

(b) the number of exporters and producers to be visited in appropriate detail to facilitate the provision of any assistance, but need not specify the names of the exporters or producers to be visited;

(c) whether assistance by the host Party will be requested and what type;

(d) where relevant, the customs offences being verified under paragraph 2(b), including relevant factual information available at the time of the notification related to the specific offences, which may include historical information; and

(e) whether the importer claimed preferential tariff treatment.

5. Upon receipt of information on a proposed visit under paragraph 2, the host Party may request information from the importing Party to facilitate planning of the visit, such as logistical arrangements or provision of requested assistance.

6. Where an importing Party seeks to conduct a site visit under paragraph 2, it shall provide the host Party, as soon as practicable and prior to the date of the first visit to an exporter or producer under this article, with a list of the names and addresses of the exporters or producers it proposes to visit.

7. Where an importing Party seeks to conduct a site visit under paragraph 2:

(a) Officials of the host Party may accompany the importing Party during the site visit.

(b) Officials of the host Party may, in accordance with its laws and regulations, on request of the importing Party or on its own initiative, assist the importing Party during the site visit and provide, to the extent available, information relevant to conduct the site visit.

(c) The importing and host Parties shall limit communication regarding the site visit to relevant government officials and shall not inform the exporter or producer outside the government of the host Party in advance of a visit or provide any other verification or enforcement information not publicly available whose disclosure could undermine the effectiveness of the action.

(d) The importing Party shall request permission from the exporter, or producer[4] for access to the relevant records or facilities, no later than the time of the visit. Unless advance notice would undermine the effectiveness of the site visit, the importing Party shall request permission with appropriate advance notice.

(e) Where the exporter or producer of textile or apparel goods denies such permission or access, the visit will not occur. The importing Party shall give consideration to any reasonable alternative dates proposed, taking into account the availability of relevant employees or facilities of the person visited.

8. Upon completion of a site visit under paragraph 2, the importing Party shall:

(a) upon request of the host Party, inform the host Party of its preliminary findings.

(b) upon receiving a written request from the host Party, provide to the host Party, no later than 90 days from the date of the request, a written report of the results of the visit, including any findings. If the report is not in English, the importing Party shall provide a translation of it in English upon request of the host Party.

(c) on written request of the exporter or producer, provide that person, no later than 90 days of the date of the request, with a written report of the results of the visit as it pertains to that exporter, or producer, including any findings. This may be a report prepared under subparagraph (b), with appropriate changes. The importing Party shall inform the exporter or producer of the entitlement to request this report. If the report is not in English, the importing Party shall provide a translation of it in English upon request of that exporter or producer.

9. Where an importing Party conducts a site visit under paragraph 2 and as a result intends to deny preferential tariff treatment to a good, it shall, before denying preferential tariff treatment, provide to the importer and any exporter or producer that provided information directly to the importing Party 30 days to submit additional information to support the claim. In cases where advance notice was not given under paragraph 7(d), such importer, exporter, or producer may request an additional 30 days.

10. The importing Party shall not reject a claim for preferential tariff treatment on the sole grounds that the host Party does not provide the requested assistance or information under this article.

12. While a verification is being conducted under Article 6, the importing Party may take appropriate measures under procedures established in its laws and regulations, including suspending or denying the application of preferential tariff treatment to textile or apparel goods of the exporter or producer subject to a verification.

13. Where verifications of identical goods by a Party indicate a pattern of conduct by an exporter or producer of false or unsupported representations that a good imported into its territory qualifies for preferential tariff treatment, the Party may withhold preferential tariff treatment for identical textile or apparel goods imported, exported or produced by such a person until it is demonstrated to the importing Party that the identical goods qualify for preferential tariff treatment. For the purpose of this paragraph, identical goods means goods that are the same in all respects relevant to the particular rule of origin that qualifies the goods as originating.

Article 4.7: Determinations

The importing Party may deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment for a textile or apparel good:

(a) for a reason listed in Article 3.28.2 (Determination on Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment);

(b) if, pursuant to a verification under this Chapter, it has not received sufficient information to determine that the good qualifies as originating; or

(c) if, pursuant to a verification under this Chapter, access or permission for the visit is denied, the importing Party is prevented from completing the visit on the proposed date and the exporter or producer does not provide an alternative date acceptable to the importing Party, or the exporter or producer does not provide access to the relevant records or facilities during a visit.

Article 4.8: Committee on Textile and Apparel Trade Matters

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Textile and Apparel Trade Matters, comprised of representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee on Textile and Apparel Trade Matters will meet at least once within one year of entry into force of the Agreement, and thereafter at such times as the Parties decide and on request of the Commission. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as may be decided by the Parties. Meetings may be conducted in person, or by any other means as decided by the Parties.

3. The Committee may consider any matter arising under this Chapter, and its functions will include review of the implementation of this Chapter, consultation on technical or interpretive difficulties that may arise under this Chapter, and discussion of ways to improve the effectiveness of cooperation under this Chapter.

4. In addition to discussions under the Committee, a Party may request discussions with any other Party or Parties regarding matters under this Chapter concerning those Parties, with a view to resolution of the issue, where it believes difficulties are occurring with respect to implementation of this Chapter

5. Unless the Parties amongst whom a discussion is requested agree otherwise, they shall hold the consultations pursuant to paragraph 4 within 30 days of receipt of a written request by a Party and endeavour to conclude within 90 days of receipt of the written request.

6. Discussions under this Article shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of any Party in any further proceeding.

Article 4.9: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in accordance with this Chapter and shall protect that information from disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position of the persons providing the information.

2. Where a Party providing information to another Party in accordance with this Chapter designates the information as confidential, the other Party shall keep the information confidential.

3. The Party providing the information may require the other Party to furnish written assurance that the information will be held in confidence, will be used only for the purposes specified in the other Party’s request for information, and will not be disclosed without the specific permission of the Party that provided the information or the person that provided the information to that Party.

4. A Party may decline to provide information requested by another Party where that Party has failed to act in conformity with paragraphs 1 through 3.

5. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for protecting from unauthorized disclosure confidential information submitted in accordance with the administration of the Party’s customs or other laws related to this Chapter, or collected in accordance with this Chapter, including information the disclosure of which could prejudice the competitive position of the person providing the information.

— — —

[1] For greater certainty, a Party shall not construe paragraph 4 to require a material on the short supply list to be produced from elastomeric yarns wholly formed in the territory of one or more of the Parties.

[2] For purposes of paragraph 4, wholly formed means all production processes and finishing operations, beginning with the extrusion of filaments, strips, film, or sheet, and including drawing to fully orient a filament or slitting a film or sheet into strip, or the spinning of all fibers into yarn, or both, and ending with a finished yarn or plied yarn.

[3] For the purposes of this Article, the information collected in accordance with this Article shall be used for the purpose of ensuring the effective implementation of this Chapter. A Party shall not use these procedures to collect information for other purposes.

[4] The importing Party shall request permission from a person who has the capacity to consent to the visit at the facilities to be visited.


*************** Chapter 5 ***************

--- Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/197ce6f0d5b3)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter will help ensure that goods trade among the TPP countries moves quickly across borders, with facilitative and transparent procedures that require customs authorities to treat goods fairly, and that reduce opportunities for conflicts of interest in customs administration. This is particularly important to small and medium-sized businesses, which often find complex customs and border procedures among the most serious obstacles to increasing their exports, and are particularly reliant on the quick movement of goods, through services such as express delivery, to reach individual customers as fast as possible. At the same time, the TPP will help enhance the ability of customs officials to prevent abuses more effectively and cooperate more efficiently against duty evasion, counterfeit trade, and other customs offenses.

Overview

Publication of Laws, Regulations, and Procedures

Transparent, widely understood rules are fundamental to efficient trade. To guarantee transparency, TPP’s Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter requires each TPP country to publish its customs laws, regulations, and procedures — online and in English, if possible. TPP Parties agree to designate contact points to whom businesses can directly ask questions.

Release of Goods

Through the Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter, TPP countries commit to ensure that goods move through borders as quickly as possible and, to the extent possible, are released within 48 hours of arrival. To prevent delays in cases where customs officials have not made a decision on the amount of duties or fees owed, the chapter will ensure that such goods can be released on bond or payment of duties, subject to appeal.

Advance Rulings

Recognizing that exporters need to know how their goods will be treated on arrival in a foreign port, the Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter requires TPP countries to provide decisions on key customs matters, including customs valuation, before goods are shipped. It also includes commitments by the TPP countries to issue these rulings as quickly as possible — no later than 150 days — after receiving a request, and to ensure that these rulings remain in place for at least three years.

Express Shipments

Because of the importance of express shipping to the competitiveness of U.S. businesses — especially small and medium-sized businesses — the Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter requires expedited customs treatment to express shipments. This will help move express shipments more quickly across borders by streamlining documentation needed to move such shipments, and by ensuring timely release of those goods. Because express shipments come in all shapes and sizes, TPP Parties have agreed to remove any existing limitations on express customs treatment for goods beyond a certain weight or value. In addition, TPP Parties will not charge any customs duties for express shipments valued below an amount that each government will set in order to further expedite the movement of goods and reduce documentation.

Penalties

Excessive or unpredictable penalties are a persistent and growing concern for U.S. exporters. To address this issue, the Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter requires customs penalties to be administered in an impartial and transparent manner — as they are in the U.S. — and requires that countries avoid conflicts of interest in administering penalties.

Customs Cooperation

To ensure that TPP Parties rather than other economies are the beneficiaries of TPP, the Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter promotes provision of assistance between TPP countries, as needed, in order to enforce customs laws and regulations, including providing information when pursuing an investigation of unlawful activity.

New Features

TPP’s Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter develops specific, ambitious commitments to facilitate trade and deepen cooperative relationships among the customs authorities of the 12 TPP countries. As the TPP countries implement these commitments, we hope to set an example for trade facilitation throughout the region. TPP is the first U.S. trade agreement to include disciplines on the imposition of customs penalties — a problem U.S. exporters encounter in many foreign markets — to ensure that our businesses are not unfairly charged inappropriate or excessive penalties. TPP also expands on customs cooperation commitments in previous trade agreements by committing all TPP countries to cooperate on preventing duty evasion, smuggling, and other customs offenses, issues of concern to all TPP countries.

Impact

The United States exports $4.5 billion worth of goods per day to the world. Clear, efficient customs procedures are essential to streamline such flows of goods across borders. The American manufacturers that deliver their products to customers by air freight, and the logistics firms that move them, count on getting their exports into those customers’ hands quickly and efficiently. The 170,000 U.S. small- and medium-sized businesses exporting to TPP countries, meanwhile, need simple, clear customs procedures, easily available on the Internet, to serve their customers. TPP’s state-of-the-art customs and trade facilitation obligations will greatly enhance the ability of American workers and businesses to export their products into Asia-Pacific production and supply chains.

TPP’s Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation chapter will help American businesses and workers take full advantage of the opportunities provided by TPP by addressing:

Delays at Borders

Long delays in customs processing of goods, especially those needed for just-in-time manufacturing, can block high-value shipments and weaken the functioning of regional supply chains.

Costly and burdensome customs procedures

Exporters, especially small businesses, need to be able to understand customs laws and procedures and electronically complete import and export requirements in order to save time and help them compete.

Inequitable treatment and conflicts of interest

In many other countries, inequitable treatment of traders by customs authorities is a serious problem. Transparent systems with clear and enforceable rules reduce the opportunities for officials to charge duties far in excess of the duties owed on a shipment or to charge penalties with no clear basis. Addressing these issues through TPP will make it easier for exporters, especially small businesses, to sell their products across the region.

Duty evasion and circumvention

TPP rules will reduce the risk that some will seek to evade customs duties or to illegally transship goods from non-TPP Parties to take advantage of the lower duties or other benefits of TPP. Strong enforcement of customs rules and cooperation among the TPP Parties allows U.S. businesses and workers to benefit, while other countries who are not part of TPP cannot.

Article 5.1: Customs Procedures and Facilitation of Trade

Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures are applied in a manner that is predictable, consistent and transparent.

Article 5.2: Customs Cooperation

1. With a view to facilitating the effective operation of this Agreement, each Party shall:

(a) encourage cooperation with other Parties regarding significant customs issues that affect goods traded between the Parties; and

(b) endeavour to provide each Party with advance notice of any significant administrative change, modification of a law or regulation, or similar measure related to its laws or regulations that governs importations or exportations, that is likely to substantially affect the operation of this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall, in accordance with its law, cooperate with the other Parties through information sharing and other activities as appropriate, to achieve compliance with their respective laws and regulations that pertain to:

(a) the implementation and operation of the provisions of this Agreement governing importations or exportations, including claims for preferential tariff treatment, procedures for making claims for preferential tariff treatment and verification procedures;

(b) the implementation, application and operation of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports;

(d) investigation and prevention of customs offences, including duty evasion and smuggling; and

(e) other customs matters as the Parties may decide.

3. If a Party has a reasonable suspicion of unlawful activity related to its laws or regulations governing importations, it may request that another Party provide specific confidential information that is normally collected in connection with the importation of goods.

4. If a Party makes a request under paragraph 3, it shall:

(a) be in writing;

(b) specify the purpose for which the information is sought; and

(c) identify the requested information with sufficient specificity for the other Party to locate and provide the information.

5. The Party from which the information is requested under paragraph 3 shall, subject to its law and any relevant international agreements to which it is a party, provide a written response containing the requested information.

6. For the purposes of paragraph 3, “a reasonable suspicion of unlawful activity” means a suspicion based on relevant factual information obtained from public or private sources comprising one or more of the following:

(a) historical evidence of non-compliance with laws or regulations that govern importations by an importer or exporter;

(b) historical evidence of non-compliance with laws or regulations that govern importations by a manufacturer, producer or other person involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;

(c) historical evidence of non-compliance with laws or regulations that govern importations by some or all of the persons involved in the movement of goods within a specific product sector from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party; or

(d) other information that the requesting Party and the Party from which the information is requested agree is sufficient in the context of a particular request.

7. Each Party shall endeavour to provide another Party with any other information that would assist that Party to determine whether imports from, or exports to, that Party are in compliance with the receiving Party’s laws or regulations that govern importations, in particular those related to unlawful activities, including smuggling and similar infractions.

8. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, a Party receiving a request shall endeavour to provide the Party that made the request with technical advice and assistance for the purpose of:

(a) developing and implementing improved best practices and risk management techniques;

(b) facilitating the implementation of international supply chain standards;

(c) simplifying and enhancing procedures for clearing goods through customs in a timely and efficient manner;

(d) developing the technical skill of customs personnel; and

(e) enhancing the use of technologies that can lead to improved compliance with the requesting Party’s laws or regulations that govern importations.

9. The Parties shall endeavour to establish or maintain channels of communication for customs cooperation, including by establishing contact points in order to facilitate the rapid and secure exchange of information and improve coordination on importation issues.

Article 5.3: Advance Rulings

1. Each Party shall issue, prior to the importation of a good of a Party into its territory, a written advance ruling at the written request of an importer in its territory, or an exporter or producer in the territory of another Party,[1] with regard to:[2]

(a) tariff classification;

(b) the application of customs valuation criteria for a particular case in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) whether a good is originating in accordance with Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures); and

(d) such other matters as the Parties may decide.

2. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling as expeditiously as possible and in no case later than 150 days after it receives a request, provided that the requester has submitted all the information that the receiving Party requires to make the advance ruling. This includes a sample of the good for which the requester is seeking an advance ruling if requested by the receiving Party. In issuing an advance ruling, the Party shall take into account the facts and circumstances that the requester has provided. For greater certainty, a Party may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and circumstances forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of administrative or judicial review. A Party that declines to issue an advance ruling shall promptly notify the requester in writing, setting out the relevant facts and circumstances and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the advance ruling.

3. Each Party shall provide that its advance rulings shall take effect on the date that they are issued or on another date specified in the ruling, and remain in effect for at least three years, provided that the law, facts and circumstances on which the ruling is based remain unchanged. If a Party’s law provides that an advance ruling becomes ineffective after a fixed period of time, that Party shall endeavour to provide procedures that allow the requester to renew the ruling expeditiously before it becomes ineffective, in situations in which the law, facts and circumstances on which the ruling was based remain unchanged.

4. After issuing an advance ruling, the Party may modify or revoke the advance ruling if there is a change in the law, facts or circumstances on which the ruling was based, if the ruling was based on inaccurate or false information, or if the ruling was in error.

5. A Party may apply a modification or revocation in accordance with paragraph 4 after it provides notice of the modification or revocation and the reasons for it.

6. No Party shall apply a revocation or modification retroactively to the detriment of the requester unless the ruling was based on inaccurate or false information provided by the requester.

7. Each Party shall ensure that requesters have access to administrative review of advance rulings.

8. Subject to any confidentiality requirements in its law, each Party shall endeavour to make its advance rulings publicly available including online.

Article 5.4: Response to Requests for Advice or Information

On request from an importer in its territory, or an exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, a Party shall expeditiously provide advice or information relevant to the facts contained in the request on:

(a) the requirements for qualifying for quotas, such as tariff rate quotas;

(b) the application of duty drawback, deferral or other types of relief that reduce, refund or waive customs duties;

(c) the eligibility requirements for goods under Article 2.6 (Goods Re-entered after Repair and Alteration);

(d) country of origin marking, if it is a prerequisite for importation; and

(e) other matters as the Parties may decide.

Article 5.5: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall ensure that any person to whom it issues a determination[3] on a customs matter has access to:

(a) administrative review of the determination, independent[4] of the employee or office that issued the determination; and

(b) judicial review of the determination.[5]

2. Each Party shall ensure that an authority that conducts a review under paragraph 1 notifies the parties to the matter in writing of its decision, and the reasons for the decision. A Party may require a request as a condition for providing the reasons for a decision in the review.

Article 5.6: Automation

1. Each Party shall:

(a) endeavour to use international standards with respect to procedures for the release of goods;

(b) make electronic systems accessible to customs users;

(c) employ electronic or automated systems for risk analysis and targeting;

(d) endeavour to implement common standards and elements for import and export data in accordance with the World Customs Organization (WCO) Data Model;

(e) take into account, as appropriate, WCO standards, recommendations, models and methods developed through the WCO or APEC; and

(f) work toward developing a set of common data elements that are drawn from the WCO Data Model and related WCO recommendations as well as guidelines to facilitate government to government electronic sharing of data for purposes of analysing trade flows.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to provide a facility that allows importers and exporters to electronically complete standardised import and export requirements at a single entry point.

Article 5.7: Express Shipments

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for express shipments while maintaining appropriate customs control and selection. These procedures shall:

(a) provide for information necessary to release an express shipment to be submitted and processed before the shipment arrives;

(b) allow a single submission of information covering all goods contained in an express shipment, such as a manifest, through, if possible, electronic means;[6]

(c) to the extent possible, provide for the release of certain goods with a minimum of documentation;

(d) under normal circumstances, provide for express shipments to be released within six hours after submission of the necessary customs documents, provided the shipment has arrived;

(e) apply to shipments of any weight or value recognising that a Party may require formal entry procedures as a condition for release, including declaration and supporting documentation and payment of customs duties, based on the good’s weight or value; and

(f) provide that, under normal circumstances, no customs duties will be assessed on express shipments valued at or below a fixed amount set under the Party’s law.[7] Each Party shall review the amount periodically taking into account factors that it may consider relevant such as rates of inflation, effect on trade facilitation, impact on risk management, administrative cost of collecting duties compared to the amount of duties, cost of cross-border trade transactions, impact on SMEs or other factors related to the collection of customs duties.

2. If a Party does not provide the treatment in paragraph 1(a) through (f) to all shipments, that Party shall provide a separate[8] and expedited customs procedure that provides that treatment for express shipments.

Article 5.8: Penalties

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that allow for the imposition of a penalty by a Party’s customs administration for a breach of its customs laws, regulations or procedural requirements, including those governing tariff classification, customs valuation, country of origin and claims for preferential treatment under this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that a penalty imposed by its customs administration for a breach of a customs law, regulation or procedural requirement is imposed only on the person legally responsible for the breach.

3. Each Party shall ensure that the penalty imposed by its customs administration is dependent on the facts and circumstances[9] of the case and is commensurate with the degree and severity of the breach.

4. Each Party shall ensure that it maintains measures to avoid conflicts of interest in the assessment and collection of penalties and duties. No portion of the remuneration of a government official shall be calculated as a fixed portion or percentage of any penalties or duties assessed or collected.

5. Each Party shall ensure that if a penalty is imposed by its customs administration for a breach of a customs law, regulation or procedural requirement, an explanation in writing is provided to the person upon whom the penalty is imposed specifying the nature of the breach and the law, regulation or procedure used for determining the penalty amount.

6. If a person voluntarily discloses to a Party’s customs administration the circumstances of a breach of a customs law, regulation or procedural requirement prior to the discovery of the breach by the customs administration, the Party’s customs administration shall, if appropriate, consider this fact as a potential mitigating factor when a penalty is established for that person.

7. Each Party shall provide in its laws, regulations or procedures, or otherwise give effect to, a fixed and finite period within which its customs administration may initiate proceedings[10] to impose a penalty relating to a breach of a customs law, regulation or procedural requirement.

8. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, a customs administration may impose, outside of the fixed and finite period, a penalty where this is in lieu of judicial or administrative tribunal proceedings.

Article 5.9: Risk Management

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management system for assessment and targeting that enables its customs administration to focus its inspection activities on high-risk goods and that simplifies the clearance and movement of low-risk goods.

2. In order to facilitate trade, each Party shall periodically review and update, as appropriate, the risk management system specified in paragraph 1.

Article 5.10: Release of Goods

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods in order to facilitate trade between the Parties. This paragraph shall not require a Party to release a good if its requirements for release have not been met.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

(a) provide for the release of goods within a period no longer than that required to ensure compliance with its customs laws and, to the extent possible, within 48 hours of the arrival of the goods;

(b) provide for the electronic submission and processing of customs information in advance of the arrival of the goods in order to expedite the release of goods from customs control upon arrival;

(c) allow goods to be released at the point of arrival without temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities; and

(d) allow an importer to obtain the release of goods prior to the final determination of customs duties, taxes and fees by the importing Party’s customs administration when these are not determined prior to or promptly upon arrival, provided that the good is otherwise eligible for release and any security required by the importing Party has been provided or payment under protest, if required by a Party, has been made. Payment under protest refers to payment of duties, taxes and fees if the amount is in dispute and procedures are available to resolve the dispute.

3. If a Party allows for the release of goods conditioned on a security, it shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

(a) ensure that the amount of the security is no greater than that required to ensure that obligations arising from the importation of the goods will be fulfilled;

(b) ensure that the security shall be discharged as soon as possible after its customs administration is satisfied that the obligations arising from the importation of the goods have been fulfilled; and

(c) allow importers to provide security using non-cash financial instruments, and including, in appropriate cases where an importer frequently enters goods, instruments covering multiple entries.

Article 5.11: Publication

1. Each Party shall make publicly available including online its customs laws, regulations, and general administrative procedures and guidelines, to the extent possible in the English language.

2. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more enquiry points to address enquiries from interested persons concerning customs matters and shall make information concerning the procedures for making such enquiries publicly available online.

3. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance regulations of general application governing customs matters that it proposes to adopt and shall provide interested persons the opportunity to comment before the Party adopts the regulation.

Article 5.12: Confidentiality

1. If a Party provides information to another Party in accordance with this Chapter and designates the information as confidential, the other Party shall keep the information confidential. The Party that provides the information may require the other Party to furnish written assurance that the information will be held in confidence, used only for the purposes specified in the other Party’s request for information, and not disclosed without the specific permission of the Party that provided the information or the person that provided the information to that Party.

2. A Party may decline to provide information requested by another Party if that Party has failed to act in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for protecting from unauthorised disclosure confidential information submitted in accordance with the administration of the Party’s customs laws, including information the disclosure of which could prejudice the competitive position of the person providing the information.

— — —

[1] For greater certainty, an importer, exporter or producer may submit a request for an advance ruling through a duly authorised representative.

[2] For greater certainty, a Party is not required to provide an advance ruling when it does not maintain measures of the type subject to the ruling request.

[3] For the purposes of this Article, a determination, if made by Peru, means an administrative act.

[4] The level of administrative review may include any authority supervising the customs administration.

[5] Brunei Darussalam may comply with this paragraph by establishing or maintaining an independent body to provide impartial review of the determination.

[6] For greater certainty, additional documents may be required as a condition for release.

[7] Notwithstanding this Article, a Party may assess customs duties, or may require formal entry documents, for restricted or controlled goods such as goods subject to import licensing or similar requirements.

[8] For greater certainty, “separate” does not mean a specific facility or lane.

[9] Facts and circumstances shall be established objectively according to each Party’s law.

[10] For greater certainty, “proceedings” means administrative measures by the customs administration and does not include judicial proceedings.


*************** Chapter 6 ***************

--- Trade Remedies ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/edc8bd7d4a7e)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Trade Remedies chapter ensures that U.S. producers remain fully able to use trade remedy laws, including safeguards, anti-dumping, and countervailing duties, to address injury resulting from a sudden surge in imports, the sale of exports below a country’s domestic price, or the provision of subsidies to producers of exported products. At the same time, the chapter ensures that U.S. exporters facing trade remedy measures initiated by other countries — which are increasingly common and affect over $1 billion in U.S. exports annually — are provided procedural due process, and that procedures used by other TPP countries are transparent.

Overview

Antidumping and Countervailing Duty

The TPP Agreement will not affect the rights and obligations under the World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements relevant to anti-dumping and countervailing duties (AD/CVD), nor confer additional rights or obligations. It promotes certain well-recognized transparency and due process practices in trade remedy proceedings, such as written notification to another Party of receipt of an AD/CVD application, transparency and due process notifications, maintenance of public files providing availability to all non-confidential documents in the administrative record, and disclosure of key facts on which the decision on whether to apply AD/CVD measures was based. Nothing in this chapter affects our ability to use and enforce U.S. anti-dumping, countervailing duty, or safeguard laws.

Global safeguards

The TPP Agreement will not affect the rights and obligations of TPP Parties under the WTO agreements relating to safeguards, confer additional rights, or impose new obligations. It requires, however, that TPP countries provide for notification electronically of the notifications already required by the WTO once a Party initiates a WTO safeguard investigation. It also prohibits Parties from imposing more than one safeguard on a product at the same time, whether it be a global safeguard, a transitional safeguard, or another special safeguard set out in the TPP Agreement.

Transitional safeguard mechanism

The Trade Remedies chapter allows TPP Parties to apply a transitional safeguard measure to one, some, or all other TPP Parties during the period in which a tariff is being phased out if imports from those Parties have increased as a result of the tariff cuts. These measures can be maintained for up to two years, with a one-year extension. So as to facilitate adjustment, transitional safeguard measures must be progressively liberalized if they last longer than a year.

Notification and Consultation

When conducting a transitional safeguard investigation, TPP Parties must notify the other Parties of the key milestones in the investigation: initiation, making a finding of serious injury, a decision to apply or extend the measure, and a decision to modify the measure. Parties also must notify the other Party should they decide to apply or extend the transitional safeguard.

Compensation

A Party applying a transitional safeguard measure must provide mutually-agreed compensation in the form of concessions having equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the additional duties expected to result from the measure. Alternatively, a Party facing a transitional safeguard may suspend equivalent concessions, after notification to the other Party or Parties, if the Parties cannot agree on compensation.

New Features

While maintaining current U.S. laws on trade remedies, TPP enhances our efforts to promote best practices in foreign AD/CVD investigations consistent with the strong due process and transparency U.S. law guarantees to exporters in other countries. These provisions will help ensure that U.S. exporters facing trade remedy investigations initiated by other countries are provided procedural due process and can defend themselves in a transparent environment. Another new feature in this chapter is the opportunity it presents for a TPP industry to request that transitional safeguard measures be imposed against one, some, or all of the other TPP countries where imports are believed to be a cause or threat of serious injury.

Impact

While the United States maintains an open market, U.S. policy has recognized for over 120 years that industries and their workers at times may be confronted with unfair trade practices and many other disruptions that require a rapid but temporary response through import relief. An important example, dating from 2009, was the Obama administration’s use of a “special safeguard” to impose temporary, three-year tariffs on certain Chinese-made automobile tires to provide relief after a sharp and sudden increase in imports threatened jobs and production in the United States. Accordingly, we have ensured that TPP provisions do not weaken U.S. trade remedy laws.

At the same time, TPP will ensure that trade remedies laws in our partner countries will offer due process and transparency. This is a principle embedded in U.S. trade law. It is important that foreign trade remedy systems reflect the same fair principles. This is particularly essential as U.S. exports face frequent cases abroad, with 62 of the 982 anti-dumping cases filed outside the U.S. from 2010 to 2014 targeting U.S. products.

Section A: Safeguard Measures

Article 6.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Section:

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive good operating within the territory of a Party, or those producers whose collective production of the like or directly competitive good constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of that good;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic industry;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is clearly imminent;

transition period means, in relation to a particular good, the three-year period beginning on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except where the tariff elimination for the good occurs over a longer period of time, in which case the transition period shall be the period of the staged tariff elimination for that good; and

transitional safeguard measure means a measure described in Article 6.3.2 (Imposition of a Transitional Safeguard Measure).

Article 6.2: Global Safeguards

1. Nothing in this Agreement affects the rights and obligations of the Parties under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

2. Except as provided in paragraph 3, nothing in this Agreement shall confer any rights or impose any obligations on the Parties with regard to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

3. A Party that initiates a safeguard investigatory process shall provide to the other Parties an electronic copy of the notification given to the WTO Committee on Safeguards under Article 12.1(a) of the Safeguards Agreement.

4. No Party shall apply or maintain a safeguard measure under this Chapter, to any product imported under a tariff rate quota (TRQ) established by the Party under this Agreement. A Party taking a safeguard measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement may exclude from the safeguard measure imports of originating goods under a TRQ established by the Party under this Agreement and set out in Appendix A to the Party’s schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination), if such imports are not a cause of serious injury or threat thereof.

5. No Party shall apply or maintain two or more of the following measures, with respect to the same good, at the same time:

(a) a transitional safeguard measure under this Chapter;

(b) a safeguard measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement;

(c) a safeguard measure set out in Appendix B to its Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination); or

(d) an emergency action under Chapter 4 (Textiles and Apparel).

Article 6.3: Imposition of a Transitional Safeguard Measure

1. A Party may apply a transitional safeguard measure described in paragraph 2, during the transition period only, if as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement:

(a) an originating good of another Party, individually, is being imported into the Party’s territory in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such conditions, as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry that produces a like or directly competitive good; or

(b) an originating good of two or more Parties, collectively, is being imported into the Party’s territory in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such conditions, as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry that produces a like or directly competitive good, provided that the Party applying the transitional safeguard measure demonstrates, with respect to the imports from each such Party against which the transitional safeguard measure is applied, that imports of the originating good from each of those Parties have increased, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, since the date of entry into force of this Agreement for those Parties.

2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, the Party may, to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment:

(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided for under this Agreement on the good; or

(b) increase the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not to exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty in effect at the time the measure is applied; and

(ii) the most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty in effect on the day immediately preceding the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

The Parties understand that neither tariff rate quotas nor quantitative restrictions would be a permissible form of transitional safeguard measure.

Article 6.4: Standards for a Transitional Safeguard Measure

1. A Party shall maintain a transitional safeguard measure only for such period of time as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment.

2. That period shall not exceed two years, except that the period may be extended by up to one year if the competent authority of the Party that applies the measure determines, in conformity with the procedures set out in Article 6.5 (Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements), that the transitional safeguard measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment.

3. No Party shall maintain a transitional safeguard measure beyond the expiration of the transition period.

4. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a transitional safeguard measure is over one year, the Party that applies the measure shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals during the period of application.

5. On the termination of a transitional safeguard measure, the Party that applied the measure shall apply the rate of customs duty set out in the Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination) as if that Party had never applied the transitional safeguard measure.

6. No Party shall apply a transitional safeguard measure more than once on the same good.

Article 6.5: Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements

1. A Party shall apply a transitional safeguard measure only following an investigation by the Party’s competent authorities in accordance with Article 3 and Article 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement; to this end, Article 3 and Article 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. In the investigation described in paragraph 1, the Party shall comply with the requirements of Article 4.2(a) and Article 4.2(b) of the Safeguards Agreement; to this end, Article 4.2(a) and Article 4.2(b) of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 6.6: Notification and Consultation

1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Parties, in writing, if it:

(a) initiates a transitional safeguard investigation under this Chapter;

(b) makes a finding of serious injury, or threat of serious injury, caused by increased imports, as set out in Article 6.3 (Imposition of a Transitional Safeguard Measure);

(c) takes a decision to apply or extend a transitional safeguard measure; and

(d) takes a decision to modify a transitional safeguard measure previously undertaken.

2. A Party shall provide to the other Parties a copy of the public version of the report of its competent authorities that is required under Article 6.5.1 (Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements).

3. When a Party makes a notification pursuant to paragraph 1(c) that it is applying or extending a transitional safeguard measure, that Party shall include in that notification:

(a) evidence of serious injury, or threat of serious injury, caused by increased imports of an originating good of another Party or Parties as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement;

(b) a precise description of the originating good subject to the transitional safeguard measure including its heading or subheading under the HS Code, on which the schedules of tariff commitments in Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination) are based;

(c) a precise description of the transitional safeguard measure;

(d) the date of the transitional safeguard measure’s introduction, its expected duration and, if applicable, a timetable for progressive liberalisation of the measure,; and

(e) in the case of an extension of the transitional safeguard measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is adjusting.

4. On request of a Party whose good is subject to a transitional safeguard proceeding under this Chapter, the Party that conducts that proceeding shall enter into consultations with the requesting Party to review a notification under paragraph 1 or any public notice or report that the competent investigating authority issued in connection with the proceeding.

Article 6.7 Compensation

1. A Party applying a transitional safeguard measure shall, after consultations with each Party against whose good the transitional safeguard measure is applied, provide mutually agreed trade liberalising compensation in the form of concessions that have substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the transitional safeguard measure. The Party shall provide an opportunity for those consultations no later than 30 days after the application of the transitional safeguard measure.

2. If the consultations under paragraph 1 do not result in an agreement on trade liberalising compensation within 30 days, any Party against whose good the transitional safeguard measure is applied may suspend the application of substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party applying the transitional safeguard measure.

3. A Party against whose good the transitional safeguard measure is applied shall notify the Party applying the transitional safeguard measure in writing at least 30 days before it suspends concessions in accordance with paragraph 2.

4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 1 and the right to suspend concessions under paragraph 2 terminates on the termination of the transitional safeguard measure.

Section B: Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 6.8: Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, the AD Agreement and the SCM Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall confer any rights or impose any obligations on the Parties with regard to proceedings or measures taken pursuant to Article VI of GATT 1994, the AD Agreement or the SCM Agreement.

3. No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Section or Annex 6-A (Practices Relating to Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Proceedings).

Annex 6-A: Practices Relating to Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Proceedings

The Parties recognise, in Article 6.8 (Antidumping and Countervailing Duties), the right of the Parties to apply trade remedy measures consistent with Article VI of GATT 1994, the AD Agreement and the SCM Agreement, the Parties recognise the following practices[1] as promoting the goals of transparency and due process in trade remedy proceedings:

(a) Upon receipt by a Party’s investigating authorities of a properly documented antidumping or countervailing duty application with respect to imports from another Party, and no later than seven days before initiating an investigation, the Party provides written notification of its receipt of the application to the other Party.

(b) In any proceeding in which the investigating authorities determine to conduct an in-person verification of information that is provided by a respondent[2], and that is pertinent to the calculation of antidumping duty margins or the level of a countervailable subsidy, the investigating authorities promptly notify each respondent of their intent, and:

(i) provide to each respondent at least 10 working days advance notice of the dates on which the authorities intend to conduct an in-person verification of the information;

(ii) at least five working days prior to an in-person verification, provide to the respondent a document that sets out the topics the respondent should be prepared to address during the verification and that describes the types of supporting documentation to be made available for review; and

(iii) after an in-person verification is completed, and subject to the protection of confidential information[3], issue a written report that describes the methods and procedures followed in carrying out the verification and the extent to which the information provided by the respondent was supported by the documents reviewed during the verification. The report is made available to all interested parties in sufficient time for the parties to defend their interests.

(c) A Party’s investigating authorities maintain a public file for each investigation and review that contains:

(i) all non-confidential documents that are part of the record of the investigation or review; and

(ii) to the extent feasible without revealing confidential information, non-confidential summaries of confidential information that is contained in the record of each investigation or review. To the extent that individual information is not susceptible of summarisation, it may be aggregated by the investigating authority.

The public file and a list of all documents that are contained in the record of the investigation or review are physically available for inspection and copying during the investigating authorities’ normal business hours or electronically available for download[4].

(d) If, in an antidumping or countervailing duty action that involves imports from another Party, a Party’s investigating authorities determine that a timely response to a request for information does not comply with the request, the investigating authorities inform the interested party that submitted the response of the nature of the deficiency and, to the extent practicable in light of time limits established to complete the antidumping or countervailing duty action, provide that interested party with an opportunity to remedy or explain the deficiency. If that interested party submits further information in response to that deficiency and the investigating authorities find that the response is not satisfactory, or that the response is not submitted within the applicable time limits, and if the investigating authorities disregard all or part of the original and subsequent responses, the investigating authorities explain in the determination or other written document the reasons for disregarding the information.

(e) Before a final determination is made, the investigating authorities inform all interested parties of the essential facts that form the basis of the decision whether to apply definitive measures. Subject to the protection of confidential information, the investigating authorities may use any reasonable means to disclose the essential facts, which includes a report summarising the data in the record, a draft or preliminary determination or some combination of those reports or determinations, to provide interested parties an opportunity to respond to the disclosure of essential facts.

— — —

[1] The practices included in this Annex do not constitute a comprehensive list of practices relating to antidumping and countervailing duty proceedings. No inference shall be drawn from the inclusion or exclusion of a particular aspect of such proceedings in this list.

[2] For the purposes of this paragraph, “respondent” means a producer, manufacturer, exporter, importer, and, where appropriate, a government or government entity, that is required by a Party’s investigating authorys to respond to an antidumping or countervailing duty questionnaire.

[3] For the purposes of this Annex, “confidential information” includes information which is provided on a confidential basis and which is by its nature confidential, for example, because its disclosure would be of significant competitive advantage to a competitor or because its disclosure would have a significantly adverse effect upon a person supplying the information or upon a person from whom that person acquired the information.

[4] Charges for the copies, if any, are limited in amount to the approximate cost of the services rendered.


*************** Chapter 7 ***************

--- Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/139878f69771)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s chapter on Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) measures gives American farmers and ranchers a fair chance to feed the region’s people; ensures that America’s food supply remains among the safest in the world; and helps all TPP partners — including developing country TPP Parties — better protect the health and safety of their food through modern, science-based food safety regulation. This involves ensuring that our partners use science and risk analysis as a foundation for SPS measures, which mirrors U.S. food and agricultural safety policy. As examples, they must use appropriate import check and restriction policies focused on direct threats to health and safety, avoid duplicative or unnecessary testing requirements where food already meets accepted international standards, and use transparent procedures for developing regulations — including opportunities for public comment. Nothing in this chapter in any way lessens or compromises our right and ability to protect U.S. consumers or U.S. agriculture, or to enforce our food safety rules. On the contrary, it will help TPP partners better ensure the health and safety of their food.

Overview

The SPS chapter designs new rules that will ensure that science-based SPS measures are developed and implemented in a transparent, predictable, and non-discriminatory manner, while at the same time preserving the ability of U.S. and other TPP regulatory agencies to take necessary steps to ensure food safety, and protect plant and animal health.

Science and Risk Analysis

Mirroring U.S. regulatory procedures, the SPS chapter in TPP establishes rules for identifying and managing SPS risks, while preserving the ability to maintain regulations that are not more trade restrictive than necessary and consistent with World Trade Organization (WTO) principles. For example, TPP:

Provides that SPS measures are based on science and that SPS measures either conform to the relevant international standards, or are based on documented, objective, scientific evidence;Requires that each risk assessment conducted is appropriate to the circumstances of the risk and that the risk management measure is no more trade restrictive than required to achieve the country’s appropriate level of protection;Ensures that SPS measures do not arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate between Parties where identical or similar conditions prevail between one TPP Party and that of other Parties; andEncourages Parties to use risk communication techniques to share information and explain measures to consumers and other stakeholders.

Transparency

Because not all countries have a transparent process for the public to comment on proposed regulations, the SPS chapter includes commitments to ensure that the public can comment on proposed measures and that producers understand the requirements they must meet in each country. The approach is similar to the U.S. rulemaking process.

Import Checks

The SPS chapter commits TPP Parties to ensure that import checks for SPS requirements are based on the actual potential risk posed by the import. In addition, the chapter requires Parties to inform importers or exporters within seven days if a shipment is being prohibited or restricted entry for a reason related to food safety or animal or plant health.

Emergency Measures

The SPS Chapter enables TPP Parties to take the emergency measures they deem necessary to protect food safety, and human, animal, and plant health. To discourage the use of such measures just as a means to block market access, it requires Parties to disclose the scientific basis for them.

Certification

Most Parties maintain certification requirements for import into their market. The SPS chapter ensures that SPS certificates only require information related to SPS issues.

Equivalency and Regionalization

TPP’s SPS chapter will improve the communications and information exchange between governments when a TPP country is considering equivalency or regionalization requests, and in doing so, will improve the predictability and the scientific basis for other countries’ decisions.

Food Safety Audits

The SPS chapter promotes the use of audits to assess the adequacy of another country’s food safety regulatory system, consistent with the U.S. approach. In addition, the chapter establishes a process of communication between Parties regarding the requirements, processes, and procedures for conducting audits.

Cooperative Technical Consultations (CTC)

To help encourage the early and expeditious resolution of SPS matters, the SPS chapter establishes a consultative mechanism under which relevant agencies will work to find science-based solutions to SPS issues that emerge between TPP countries.

Dispute Settlement

Where the CTC mechanism does not resolve a matter, Parties may use the agreement’s dispute settlement mechanism to enforce most of the SPS commitments. However, to ensure that Parties have sufficient time to align their SPS procedures with the TPP requirements, the application of dispute settlement will be phased in for certain provisions. The underlying WTO-based SPS obligations upon which the commitments in this chapter are based also remain subject to WTO dispute settlement.

New Features

TPP includes new obligations that build on the WTO’s 1994 SPS agreement rather than simply reaffirming the commitments of the WTO SPS agreement as previous U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) have done. TPP includes important new features supporting the roughly $70 billion in U.S. food and agricultural exports to the TPP partners, while safeguarding the strong food safety regulatory system we already have in the United States:

New obligations that promote science-based and transparent regulation should lead to improvements in the food safety and animal and plant health regulatory systems of other TPP countries, ensuring that U.S. food safety is maintained, and animal and plant life protected. The provisions requiring documented, objective, scientific evidence better align other countries’ regulatory systems with U.S. safety and regulatory systems, helping to provide a safer food supply and protecting American agriculture, while supporting improved food safety generally.TPP commitments promote the use of risk analysis to improve the scientific basis of SPS regulations and the use of risk communication to exchange information and opinions concerning risk and risk-related factors among regulatory authorities, consumers, and other stakeholders.TPP promotes transparency by requiring publication of SPS regulations for public comment. Allowing public comment strengthens the ability of regulatory agencies to develop science-based regulations that facilitate trade and helps broaden public understanding of these agencies’ work.New TPP obligations require all TPP countries to notify importers or exporters of shipments being detained for SPS concerns. This rapid notification will help importers and exporters address concerns, which is particularly important for perishable products.TPP commitments permit an importing country to conduct an audit of an exporting country’s food safety regulatory system to determine whether the exported food meets the importing country’s requirements. This will mean that the U.S. can use systems audits to enhance confidence in the safety of imported food, while minimizing the need for inspections by multiple foreign countries of tens of thousands of U.S. food processing plants.TPP provides a new consultative mechanism for seeking quick resolution of measures related to U.S. food and agricultural exports, which will allow regulatory agencies to ensure that these issues are resolved based on safety and science.

Impact

Demographic and economic trends suggest that the Asia-Pacific region will be home to 3.2 billion middle-class consumers by 2030. They will be the world’s largest buyers of staple grains, fresh fruits and vegetables, dairy products, meats, and other farm products, and the United States is wellplaced to provide them with these goods. This requires both access to markets and fair regulations for food safety, and animal and plant health, known technically as sanitary and phytosanitary, or “SPS” measures.

The United States has one of the strongest regulatory systems in the world to ensure safe food for American consumers, as well as to protect animal and plant health for America’s farmers and ranchers. Internationally, however, SPS policies are often weaker. In some countries, SPS barriers are based on political considerations, not science, and are used to replace tariffs as trade barriers protecting domestic producers and prohibiting imports of U.S. food and agricultural exports. In others, antiquated or inefficient regulatory systems have not kept up with the increasing consumer demand for imported products. This reduces opportunities for American producers and also erodes the capacity of governments abroad to focus on genuine threats to human, animal, and plant health. Therefore, as we work to reduce and eliminate tariffs in TPP, we also are seeking to ensure the removal of unwarranted SPS barriers, which are among the most significant challenges faced by U.S. agricultural exporters.

The WTO’s SPS Agreement, concluded in 1994 and now in force for 161 economies around the world, is the foundation of modern SPS policy. However, in areas where the WTO rules are less clear, American producers and their foreign customers continue to face challenges, including:

Duplicative or unnecessary testing requirements;Inefficient or non-transparent border measures that lead to delays and spoilage at the port of entry.

To address these issues, the United States has approached TPP’s SPS chapter committed to ensuring that TPP governments: (1) fully retain their right to determine the level of protection they deem appropriate and that nothing in the agreement prevents regulatory agencies from doing what they deem necessary to protect food safety, and animal and plant health; (2) that they adopt the scientific standards that focus resources based on risk; and (3) that the assistance programs associated with TPP offer lower-income partners opportunities to build their capacity in this area. Ultimately, TPP’s SPS chapter will support the efforts of all TPP countries to meet their responsibility to guarantee the safety of their food — in a manner consistent with science — while at the same time ensuring that nothing in TPP lessens or compromises our ability to ensure the safety of the U.S. food supply.

Article 7.1: Definitions

1. The definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement are incorporated into this Chapter and shall form part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis.

2. In addition, for the purposes of this Chapter:

competent authority means a government body of each Party responsible for measures and matters referred to in this Chapter;

emergency measure means a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that is applied by an importing Party to another Party to address an urgent problem of human, animal or plant life or health protection that arises or threatens to arise in the Party applying the measure;

import check means an inspection, examination, sampling, review of documentation, test or procedure, including laboratory, organoleptic or identity, conducted at the border by an importing Party or its representative to determine if a consignment complies[1] with the sanitary and phytosanitary requirements of the importing Party;

import programme means mandatory sanitary or phytosanitary policies, procedures or requirements of an importing Party that govern the importation of goods;

primary representative means the government body of a Party that is responsible for the implementation of this Chapter and the coordination of that Party’s participation in Committee activities under Article 7.5 (Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures);

risk analysis means the process that consists of three components: risk assessment; risk management; and risk communication;

risk communication means the exchange of information and opinions concerning risk and risk-related factors between risk assessors, risk managers, consumers and other interested parties; and

risk management means the weighing of policy alternatives in light of the results of risk assessment and, if required, selecting and implementing appropriate control options, including regulatory measures.

Article 7.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) protect human, animal or plant life or health in the territories of the Parties while facilitating and expanding trade by utilising a variety of means to address and seek to resolve sanitary and phytosanitary issues;

(b) reinforce and build on the SPS Agreement;

(c) strengthen communication, consultation and cooperation between the Parties, and particularly between the Parties’ competent authorities and primary representatives;

(d) ensure that sanitary or phytosanitary measures implemented by a Party do not create unjustified obstacles to trade;

(e) enhance transparency in and understanding of the application of each Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary measures; and

(f) encourage the development and adoption of international standards, guidelines and recommendations, and promote their implementation by the Parties.

Article 7.3: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.

2. Nothing in this Chapter prevents a Party from adopting or maintaining halal requirements for food and food products in accordance with Islamic law.

Article 7.4: General Provisions

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the SPS Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall limit the rights and obligations that each Party has under the SPS Agreement.

Article 7.5: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary matters.

2. The objectives of the Committee are to:

(a) enhance each Party’s implementation of this Chapter;

(b) consider sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest; and

(c) enhance communication and cooperation on sanitary and phytosanitary matters.

3. The Committee:

(a) shall provide a forum to improve the Parties’ understanding of sanitary and phytosanitary issues that relate to the implementation of the SPS Agreement and this Chapter;

(b) shall provide a forum to enhance mutual understanding of each Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary measures and the regulatory processes that relate to those measures;

(c) shall exchange information on the implementation of this Chapter;

(d) shall determine the appropriate means, which may include ad hoc working groups, to undertake specific tasks related to the functions of the Committee;

(e) may identify and develop technical assistance and cooperation projects between the Parties on sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(f) may serve as a forum for a Party to share information on a sanitary or phytosanitary issue that has arisen between it and another Party or Parties, provided that the Parties between which the issue has arisen have first attempted to address the issue through discussions between themselves; and

(g) may consult on matters and positions for the meetings of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures established under Article 12 of the SPS Agreement (WTO SPS Committee), and meetings held under the auspices of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the World Organisation for Animal Health and the International Plant Protection Convention.

4. The Committee shall establish its terms of reference at its first meeting and may revise those terms as needed.

5. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and once a year thereafter unless Parties agree otherwise.

Article 7.6: Competent Authorities and Contact Points

Each Party shall provide the other Parties with a written description of the sanitary and phytosanitary responsibilities of its competent authorities and contact points within each of these authorities and identify its primary representative within 60 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party. Each Party shall keep this information up to date.

Article 7.7: Adaptation to Regional Conditions, Including Pest- or Disease-Free Areas and Areas of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence

1. The Parties recognise that adaptation to regional conditions, including regionalisation, zoning and compartmentalisation, is an important means to facilitate trade.

2. The Parties shall take into account the relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

3. The Parties may cooperate on the recognition of pest- or disease-free areas, and areas of low pest or disease prevalence with the objective of acquiring confidence in the procedures followed by each Party for the recognition of pest- or disease-free areas, and areas of low pest or disease prevalence.

4. When an importing Party receives a request for a determination of regional conditions from an exporting Party and determines that the information provided by the exporting Party is sufficient, it shall initiate an assessment within a reasonable period of time.

5. When an importing Party commences an assessment of a request for a determination of regional conditions under paragraph 4, that Party shall promptly, on request of the exporting Party, explain its process for making the determination of regional conditions.

6. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party of the status of the assessment of the exporting Party’s request for a determination of regional conditions.

7. When an importing Party adopts a measure that recognises specific regional conditions of an exporting Party, the importing Party shall communicate that measure to the exporting Party in writing and implement the measure within a reasonable period of time.

8. The importing and exporting Parties involved in a particular determination may also decide in advance the risk management measures that will apply to trade between them in the event of a change in the status.

9. The Parties involved in a determination recognising regional conditions are encouraged, if mutually agreed, to report the outcome to the Committee.

10. If the evaluation of the evidence provided by the exporting Party does not result in a determination to recognise pest- or disease-free areas, or areas of low pest and disease prevalence, the importing Party shall provide the exporting Party with the rationale for its determination.

11. If there is an incident that results in the importing Party modifying or revoking the determination recognising regional conditions, on request of the exporting Party, the Parties involved shall cooperate to assess whether the determination can be reinstated.

Article 7.8: Equivalence

1. The Parties acknowledge that recognition of the equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures is an important means to facilitate trade. Further to Article 4 of the SPS Agreement, the Parties shall apply equivalence to a group of measures or on a systems-wide basis, to the extent feasible and appropriate. In determining the equivalence of a specific sanitary or phytosanitary measure, group of measures or on a systems-wide basis, each Party shall take into account the relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

2. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall explain the objective and rationale of its sanitary or phytosanitary measure and clearly identify the risk the sanitary or phytosanitary measure is intended to address.

3. When an importing Party receives a request for an equivalence assessment and determines that the information provided by the exporting Party is sufficient, it shall initiate the equivalence assessment within a reasonable period of time.

4. When an importing Party commences an equivalence assessment, that Party shall promptly, on request of the exporting Party, explain its equivalence process and plan for making the equivalence determination and, if the determination results in recognition, for enabling trade.

5. In determining the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, an importing Party shall take into account available knowledge, information and relevant experience, as well as the regulatory competence of the exporting Party.

6. The importing Party shall recognise the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates to the importing Party that the exporting Party’s measure:

(a) achieves the same level of protection as the importing Party’s measure; or

(b) has the same effect in achieving the objective as the importing Party’s measure.[2]

7. When an importing Party adopts a measure that recognises the equivalence of an exporting Party’s specific sanitary or phytosanitary measure, group of measures or measures on a systems-wide basis, the importing Party shall communicate the measure it has adopted to the exporting Party in writing and implement the measure within a reasonable period of time.

8. The Parties involved in an equivalence determination that results in recognition are encouraged, if mutually agreed, to report the outcome to the Committee.

9. If an equivalence determination does not result in recognition by the importing Party, the importing Party shall provide the exporting Party with the rationale for its decision.

Article 7.9: Science and Risk Analysis

1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring that their respective sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on scientific principles.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures either conform to the relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations or, if its sanitary and phytosanitary measures do not conform to international standards, guidelines or recommendations, that they are based on documented and objective scientific evidence that is rationally related to the measures, while recognising the Parties’ obligations regarding assessment of risk under Article 5 of the SPS Agreement.[3]

3. Recognising the Parties’ rights and obligations under the relevant provisions of the SPS Agreement, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from:

(a) establishing the level of protection it determines to be appropriate;

(b) establishing or maintaining an approval procedure that requires a risk analysis to be conducted before the Party grants a product access to its market; or

(c) adopting or maintaining a sanitary or phytosanitary measure on a provisional basis.

4. Each Party shall:

(a) ensure that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures do not arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate between Parties where identical or similar conditions prevail, including between its own territory and that of other Parties; and

(b) conduct its risk analysis in a manner that is documented and that provides interested persons and other Parties an opportunity to comment, in a manner to be determined by that Party[4].

5. Each Party shall ensure that each risk assessment it conducts is appropriate to the circumstances of the risk at issue and takes into account reasonably available and relevant scientific data, including qualitative and quantitative information.

6. When conducting its risk analysis, each Party shall:

(a) take into account relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations;

(b) consider risk management options that are not more trade restrictive[5] than required, including the facilitation of trade by not taking any measure, to achieve the level of protection that the Party has determined to be appropriate; and

(c) select a risk management option that is not more trade restrictive than required to achieve the sanitary or phytosanitary objective, taking into account technical and economic feasibility.

7. If an importing Party requires a risk analysis to evaluate a request from an exporting Party to authorise importation of a good of that exporting Party, the importing Party shall provide, on request of the exporting Party, an explanation of the information required for the risk assessment. On receipt of the required information from the exporting Party, the importing Party shall endeavour to facilitate the evaluation of the request for authorisation by scheduling work on this request in accordance with the procedures, policies, resources, and laws and regulations of the importing Party.

8. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party of the progress of a specific risk analysis request, and of any delay that may occur during the process.

9. If the importing Party, as a result of a risk analysis, adopts a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that allows trade to commence or resume, the importing Party shall implement the measure within a reasonable period of time.

10. Without prejudice to Article 7.14 (Emergency Measures), no Party shall stop the importation of a good of another Party solely for the reason that the importing Party is undertaking a review of its sanitary or phytosanitary measure, if the importing Party permitted the importation of that good of the other Party when the review was initiated.

Article 7.10: Audits[6]

1. To determine an exporting Party’s ability to provide required assurances and meet the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the importing Party, each importing Party shall have the right, subject to this Article, to audit the exporting Party’s competent authorities and associated or designated inspection systems. That audit may include an assessment of the competent authorities’ control programmes, including: if appropriate, reviews of the inspection and audit programmes; and on-site inspections of facilities.

2. An audit shall be systems-based and designed to check the effectiveness of the regulatory controls of the competent authorities of the exporting Party.

3. In undertaking an audit, a Party shall take into account relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

4. Prior to the commencement of an audit, the importing Party and exporting Party involved shall discuss the rationale and decide: the objectives and scope of the audit; the criteria or requirements against which the exporting Party will be assessed; and the itinerary and procedures for conducting the audit.

5. The auditing Party shall provide the audited Party the opportunity to comment on the findings of the audit and take any such comments into account before the auditing Party makes its conclusions and takes any action. The auditing Party shall provide a report setting out its conclusions in writing to the audited Party within a reasonable period of time.

6. A decision or action taken by the auditing Party as a result of the audit shall be supported by objective evidence and data that can be verified, taking into account the auditing Party’s knowledge of, relevant experience with, and confidence in, the audited Party. This objective evidence and data shall be provided to the audited Party on request.

7. The costs incurred by the auditing Party shall be borne by the auditing Party, unless both Parties decide otherwise.

8. The auditing Party and audited Party shall each ensure that procedures are in place to prevent the disclosure of confidential information that is acquired during the audit process.

Article 7.11: Import Checks

1. Each Party shall ensure that its import programmes are based on the risks associated with importations, and the import checks are carried out without undue delay.[7]

2. A Party shall make available to another Party, on request, information on its import procedures and its basis for determining the nature and frequency of import checks, including the factors it considers to determine the risks associated with importations.

3. A Party may amend the frequency of its import checks as a result of experience gained through import checks or as a result of actions or discussions provided for in this Chapter.

4. An importing Party shall provide to another Party, on request, information regarding the analytical methods, quality controls, sampling procedures and facilities that the importing Party uses to test a good. The importing Party shall ensure that any testing is conducted using appropriate and validated methods in a facility that operates under a quality assurance programme that is consistent with international laboratory standards. The importing Party shall maintain physical or electronic documentation regarding the identification, collection, sampling, transportation and storage of the test sample, and the analytical methods used on the test sample.

5. An importing Party shall ensure that its final decision in response to a finding of non-conformity with the importing Party’s sanitary or phytosanitary measure, is limited to what is reasonable and necessary, and is rationally related to the available science.

6. If an importing Party prohibits or restricts the importation of a good of another Party on the basis of an adverse result of an import check, the importing Party shall provide a notification about the adverse result to at least one of the following: the importer or its agent; the exporter; the manufacturer; or the exporting Party.

7. When the importing Party provides a notification pursuant to paragraph 6, it shall:

(a) include:

(i) the reason for the prohibition or restriction;

(ii) the legal basis or authorisation for the action; and

(iii) information on the status of the affected goods and, if appropriate, on their disposition;

(b) do so in a manner consistent with its laws, regulations and requirements as soon as possible and no later than seven days[8] after the date of the decision to prohibit or restrict, unless the good is seized by a customs administration; and

(c) if the notification has not already been provided through another channel, transmit the notification by electronic means, if practicable.

8. An importing Party that prohibits or restricts the importation of a good of another Party on the basis of an adverse result of an import check shall provide an opportunity for a review of the decision and consider any relevant information submitted to assist in the review. The review request and information should be submitted to the importing Party within a reasonable period of time.[9]

9. If an importing Party determines that there is a significant, sustained or recurring pattern of non-conformity with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, the importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of the non-conformity.

10. On request, an importing Party shall provide to the exporting Party available information on goods from the exporting Party that were found not to conform to an sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the importing Party.

Article 7.12: Certification

1. The Parties recognise that assurances with respect to sanitary or phytosanitary requirements may be provided through means other than certificates and that different systems may be capable of meeting the same sanitary or phytosanitary objective.

2. If an importing Party requires certification for trade in a good, the Party shall ensure that the certification requirement is applied, in meeting the Party’s sanitary or phytosanitary objectives, only to the extent necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

3. In applying certification requirements, an importing Party shall take into account relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

4. An importing Party shall limit attestations and information it requires on the certificates to essential information that is related to the sanitary or phytosanitary objectives of the importing Party.

5. An importing Party should provide to another Party, on request, the rationale for any attestations or information that the importing Party requires to be included on a certificate.

6. The Parties may agree to work cooperatively to develop model certificates to accompany specific goods traded between the Parties, taking into account relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

7. The Parties shall promote the implementation of electronic certification and other technologies to facilitate trade.

Article 7.13: Transparency[10]

1. The Parties recognise the value of sharing information about their sanitary and phytosanitary measures on an ongoing basis, and of providing interested persons and other Parties with the opportunity to comment on their proposed sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

2. In implementing this Article, each Party shall take into account relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

3. A Party shall notify a proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure that may have an effect on the trade of another Party, including any that conforms to international standards, guidelines or recommendations, by using the WTO SPS notification submission system as a means of notifying the other Parties.

4. Unless urgent problems of human, animal or plant life or health protection arise or threaten to arise, or the measure is of a trade-facilitating nature, a Party shall normally allow at least 60 days for interested persons and other Parties to provide written comments on the proposed measure after it makes the notification under paragraph 3. If feasible and appropriate, the Party should allow more than 60 days. The Party shall consider any reasonable request from an interested person or another Party to extend the comment period. On request of another Party, the Party shall respond to the written comments of the other Party in an appropriate manner.

5. The Party shall make available to the public, by electronic means in an official journal or on a website, the proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure notified under paragraph 3, the legal basis for the measure, and the written comments or a summary of the written comments that the Party has received from the public on the measure.

6. If a Party proposes a sanitary or phytosanitary measure which does not conform to an international standard, guideline or recommendation, the Party shall provide to another Party, on request, and to the extent permitted by the confidentiality and privacy requirements of the Party’s law, the relevant documentation that the Party considered in developing the proposed measure, including documented and objective scientific evidence that is rationally related to the measure, such as risk assessments, relevant studies and expert opinions.

7. A Party that proposes to adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure shall discuss with another Party, on request and if appropriate and feasible, any scientific or trade concerns that the other Party may raise regarding the proposed measure and the availability of alternative, less trade-restrictive approaches for achieving the objective of the measure.

8. Each Party shall publish, preferably by electronic means, notices of final sanitary or phytosanitary measures in an official journal or website.

9. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of final sanitary or phytosanitary measures through the WTO SPS notification submission system. Each Party shall ensure that the text or the notice of a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure specifies the date on which the measure takes effect and the legal basis for the measure. A Party shall also make available to another Party, on request, and to the extent permitted by the confidentiality and privacy requirements of the Party’s law, significant written comments and relevant documentation considered to support the measure that were received during the comment period.

10. If a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure is substantively altered from the proposed measure, a Party shall also include in the notice of the final sanitary or phytosanitary measure that it publishes, an explanation of:

(a) the objective and rationale of the measure and how the measure advances that objective and rationale; and

(b) any substantive revisions that it made to the proposed measure.

11. An exporting Party shall notify the importing Party through the contact points referred to in Article 7.6 (Competent Authorities and Contact Points) in a timely and appropriate manner:

(a) if it has knowledge of a significant sanitary or phytosanitary risk related to the export of a good from its territory;

(b) of urgent situations where a change in animal or plant health status in the territory of the exporting Party may affect current trade;

(c) of significant changes in the status of a regionalised pest or disease;

(d) of new scientific findings of importance which affect the regulatory response with respect to food safety, pests or diseases; and

(e) of significant changes in food safety, pest or disease management, control or eradication policies or practices thatmay affect current trade.

12. If feasible and appropriate, a Party should provide an interval of more than six months between the date it publishes a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure and the date on which the measure takes effect, unless the measure is intended to address an urgent problem of human, animal or plant life or health protection or the measure is of a trade-facilitating nature.

13. A Party shall provide to another Party, on request, all sanitary or phytosanitary measures related to the importation of a good into that Party’s territory.

Article 7.14: Emergency Measures

1. If a Party adopts an emergency measure that is necessary for the protection of human, animal or plant life or health, the Party shall promptly notify the other Parties of that measure through the primary representative and the relevant contact point referred to in Article 7.6 (Competent Authorities and Contact Points). The Party that adopts the emergency measure shall take into consideration any information provided by other Parties in response to the notification.

2. If a Party adopts an emergency measure, it shall review the scientific basis of that measure within six months and make available the results of the review to any Party on request. If the emergency measure is maintained after the review, because the reason for its adoption remains, the Party should review the measure periodically.

Article 7.15: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall explore opportunities for further cooperation, collaboration and information exchange between the Parties on sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest, consistent with this Chapter. Those opportunities may include trade facilitation initiatives and technical assistance. The Parties shall cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall cooperate and may jointly identify work on sanitary and phytosanitary matters with the goal of eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 7.16: Information Exchange

A Party may request information from another Party on a matter arising under this Chapter. A Party that receives a request for information shall endeavour to provide available information to the requesting Party within a reasonable period of time, and if possible, by electronic means.

Article 7.17: Cooperative Technical Consultations

1. If a Party has concerns regarding any matter arising under this Chapter with another Party, it shall endeavour to resolve the matter by using the administrative procedures that the other Party’s competent authority has available. If the relevant Parties have bilateral or other mechanisms available to address the matter, the Party raising the matter shall endeavour to resolve the matter through those mechanisms, if it considers that it is appropriate to do so. A Party may have recourse to the Cooperative Technical Consultations (CTC) set out in paragraph 2 at any time it considers that the continued use of the administrative procedures or bilateral or other mechanisms would not resolve the matter.

2. One or more Parties (requesting Party) may initiate CTC with another Party (responding Party) to discuss any matter arising under this Chapter that the requesting Party considers may adversely affect its trade by delivering a request to the primary representative of the responding Party. The request shall be in writing and identify the reason for the request, including a description of the requesting Party’s concerns about the matter, and set out the provisions of this Chapter that relate to the matter.

3. Unless the requesting Party and the responding Party (the consulting Parties) agree otherwise, the responding Party shall acknowledge the request in writing within seven days of the date of its receipt.

4 Unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise, the consulting Parties shall meet within 30 days of the responding Party’s acknowledgement of the request to discuss the matter identified in the request, with the aim of resolving the matter within 180 days of the request if possible. The meeting shall be in person or by electronic means.

5. The consulting Parties shall ensure the appropriate involvement of relevant trade and regulatory agencies in meetings held pursuant to this Article.

6. All communications between the consulting Parties in the course of CTC, as well as all documents generated for CTC, shall be kept confidential unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise and without prejudice to the rights and obligations of any Party under this Agreement, the WTO Agreement or any other international agreement to which it is a party.

7 The requesting Party may cease CTC proceedings under this Article and have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) if:

(a) the meeting referred to in paragraph 4 does not take place within 37 days of the date of the request, or such other timeframe as the consulting Parties may agree under paragraphs 3 and 4; or

(b) the meeting referred to in paragraph 4 has been held.

8. No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for a matter arising under this Chapter without first seeking to resolve the matter through CTC in accordance with this Article.

Article 7.18: Dispute Settlement

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall apply to this Chapter, subject to the following:

(a) with respect to Article 7.8 (Equivalence), Article 7.10 (Audits) and Article 7.11 (Import Checks), Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall apply with respect to a responding Party as of one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party; and

(b) with respect to Article 7.9 (Science and Risk Analysis), Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall apply with respect to a responding Party as of two years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

2. In a dispute under this Chapter that involves scientific or technical issues, a panel should seek advice from experts chosen by the panel in consultation with the Parties involved in the dispute. To this end, the panel may, if it deems appropriate, establish an advisory technical experts group, or consult the relevant international standard setting organisations, at the request of either Party to the dispute or on its own initiative.

— — —

[1] For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that import checks are one of many tools available to assess compliance with an importing Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

[2] No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for this subparagraph.

[3] No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for this paragraph.

[4] For greater certainty, paragraph 4(b) applies only to a risk analysis for a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that constitutes a sanitary or phytosanitary regulation for the purposes of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

[5] For the purposes of paragraphs 6(b) and 6(c), a risk management option is not more trade-restrictive than required unless there is another option reasonably available, taking into account technical and economic feasibility, that achieves the appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection and is significantly less restrictive to trade.

[6] For greater certainty, nothing in this Article prevents an importing Party from performing an inspection of a facility for the purposes of determining if the facility conforms with the importing Party’s sanitary or phytosanitary requirements or conforms with sanitary or phytosanitary requirements that the importing Party has determined to be equivalent to its sanitary or phytosanitary requirements.

[7] For greater certainty, nothing in this Article prohibits a Party from performing import checks to obtain information to assess risk or to determine the need for, develop or periodically review a risk-based import programme.

[8] For the purposes of this paragraph, the term “days” does not include national holidays of the importing Party.

[9] For greater certainty, nothing in this Article prevents an importing Party from disposing of goods which are found to have an infectious pathogen or pest that, if urgent action is not taken, can spread and cause damage to human, animal or plant life or health in the Party’s territory.

[10] For greater certainty, this Article applies only to a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that constitutes a sanitary or phytosanitary regulation for the purposes of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.


*************** Chapter 8 ***************

--- Technical Barriers to Trade ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/20e57df6a7d1)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) chapter helps create an open, transparent, stakeholder-based system of standards-setting in the Asia-Pacific. It ensures that technical standards-setting, conformity assessment procedures, and technical regulations are fair and transparently developed, with opportunities for meaningful input and “bottom-up” participation in standards-setting. The TBT chapter also has specific annexes covering particular issues in information and communications technology, cosmetics, medical devices, pharmaceuticals, wines and spirits, formulas for certain food products, and organics. While making it easier for U.S. companies to export “into” Asia-Pacific supply chains and lead in innovation, the chapter preserves the full rights of governments to regulate products and manufacturing processes for public health, environmental quality, and other public-policy goals.

Overview

Technical Regulations

TPP Parties will cooperate to ensure that international standards and recommendations likely to form the basis for technical regulations do not create unnecessary barriers to trade.

Conformity Assessment

TPP parties will provide “national treatment” to one another’s conformity assessment bodies — that is, testing and certification performed by another Party’s qualified conformity assessment body will be accepted as confirmation that its products, services, or systems meet requirements of the other Party. This will make it easier for U.S. exporters to have their goods tested or certified only once before accessing other TPP markets, reducing costs and burdens for U.S. businesses, especially small firms. In no case will this alter U.S. regulations for health, food safety, product safety, or other substantive public policy goals.

Transparency

The TBT chapter ensures that stakeholders and interested parties from TPP countries have the opportunity to participate in the development of technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures by government bodies. This reflects the U.S. approach to standards-setting. As in the United States, TPP countries will publish new technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, offer opportunities for public comment, explain how a TPP country’s final regulations and conformity assessment procedures meet the objectives sought; and provide responses to substantive issues raised by comments.

Compliance Period

The TBT chapter ensures a reasonable interval between publication of regulations and entry into force so that stakeholders have sufficient time to meet the new requirements. Similarly, TPP countries have committed to provide producers a reasonable amount of time to demonstrate the conformity of their goods with the relevant requirements.

Annexes

The TBT chapter also includes several sector-specific annexes to promote common regulatory approaches across the region, including the following:

Cosmetics, Medical Devices, and PharmaceuticalsThe annexes on cosmetics, medical devices, and pharmaceuticals promotes transparent and open practices when regulating products in these sectors. For example, TPP Parties will have to consider relevant scientific and technical guidance when developing regulations, grant marketing authorizations based on specified and publically available criteria, provide reasons for rejecting applications, and establish due process procedures that allow for appeal so that U.S exporters are not unfairly or arbitrarily discriminated against in TPP markets.Information and Communications Technology (ICT) ProductsThe ICT annex covers commercial products containing cryptography and that promote the electromagnetic compatibility of information technology equipment products. With respect to ICT products that contain cryptography, TPP Parties will be prohibited from disclosure of proprietary information in order to comply with technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures, a requirement that some governments could use to expropriate proprietary information and disseminate it to competitors. Exceptions are granted for government production, sale, or use of a product as well as for requirements a TPP government maintains related to the networks it owns or controls or measures it takes related to financial institutions or markets. In cases where a TPP country requires assurance that a product complies with a technical regulation or standard for electromagnetic compatibility, Parties must accept a supplier’s declaration of conformity for unintentional electromagnetic emitters, as in the United States.Wine and Distilled SpiritsThe annex on wines and distilled spirits establishes parameters for the labeling of products, while preserving the ability of regulators to ensure consumer protection. It creates a common definition of “wine” and “distilled spirits,” to facilitate trade in these products, and also provide for supplementary labeling of wine and distilled spirits. TPP Parties commit not to reject imports solely because they use certain descriptive terms and adjectives related to wine or winemaking.Formulas for Food ProductsThe annex on formulas for food products will ensure that TPP countries retain full rights to require companies to provide information about prepackaged food and food additives. At the same time, it will ensure protection for the legitimate commercial interests and proprietary information of TPP companies by requiring TPP Parties to ensure the confidentiality of information regarding proprietary formulas that it requires companies to provide in order to meet its technical regulations and standards related to prepackaged food and food additives.Organic ProductsThe annex on organic products will promote trade in organic products and will encourage cooperation between the Parties on issues related to the production, processing, or labeling of products as organic.

New Features

TPP’s TBT chapter includes many new features, building on those in the World Trade Organization (WTO) TBT Agreement and earlier Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). These include: new transparency requirements, including public consultation requirements early in the development of new measures, enabling trade-related concerns to be vetted and addressed before new measures are finalized; requirements ensuring that information on regulatory decision making is publicly available; and greater clarification that companies will need to have their goods undergo conformity assessment procedures only once before being able to sell them in TPP markets. In addition, TPP — for the first time in a U.S. FTA — includes annexes on specific products.

Impact

Product standards facilitate commerce by providing assurances to consumers and businesses that the products they are considering purchasing are safe and effective. Without such a system, commerce would be thwarted as consumers and businesses alike find themselves unable to determine whether products worked as advertised, met specifications, and were safe to use. Measures related to standards fall into three areas. The first, standards set by business and professional standards associations, make sure products are compatible, reliable, and otherwise meet business needs. An example is the design of electrical plugs, where standards-setting among businesses ensures that they fit securely into sockets, delivering electrical current safely and without risk. A second is the technical regulations governments develop to ensure that products do not pose risks to public health or safety and environmental quality, or to address other public policy concerns. An example is components for autos or airplanes, where specific safety standards must be assured. The third is conformity assessment procedures, or objective testing to verify that the products meet the standards and technical regulations set by governments or private standard setting bodies. Such testing may be conducted by governments or by private conformity assessment bodies, depending on the product.

The U.S. standards-setting system, both public and private, places high value on transparency and stakeholder participation. The U.S. Government sets technical regulations with input from stakeholders, but sets such regulations mainly in areas that could pose public health or safety risks, while leaving other standards setting to the private sector to promote efficiency and innovation. U.S. private standard-setting bodies operate from ‘the bottom up,’ with participation by businesses, engineering and scientific associations, academics, government agencies, and the broader public. This creates a system that encourages engineers and technical experts to find innovative ways to improve products and to work with companies across a sector to develop appropriate standards that are consensus-based. The scale of the opportunities a good standards-setting system can create is illustrated by the fact that in 2009, about $118 billion of TPP countries’ exports were U.S. value-added — that is, products exported “into” supply chains by specialized U.S. firms.

Some major economies in the Asia-Pacific and elsewhere, however, rely heavily on government-mandated approaches that require particular standards that all companies must meet. Such an approach can deter innovation, create unnecessary “technical barriers to trade” that reinforce or substitute for tariffs, and serve as surreptitious ways to build invisible advantages for ‘national-champion’ firms closely linked to governments, to the detriment of American workers and businesses. TPP’s TBT chapter accordingly addresses several systemic challenges:

TransparencyUnlike in the U.S., some countries limit public participation in the development of standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures. Enabling a broad range of stakeholders to participate in the development of standards-related measures in TPP countries will help ensure that standards do not discriminate against U.S. manufactured goods, and will encourage wider acceptance of U.S. approaches to standards in the Asia-Pacific region.Fair Conformity AssessmentOverly-restrictive conformity assessment procedures can hinder U.S. exports, for example by requiring testing procedures to be conducted in the importing country after American labs have already validated a product, or by imposing burdensome requirements on foreign testing facilities as a means of discouraging imports.Promoting U.S. Exports in Key SectorsIn many industries — medical and information technologies, foods and wines, medicines and cosmetics, and others — countries have not yet established their own standards-setting procedures or may follow the standards of U.S. competitors, such as the EU, which has aggressively promoted its standards to support its exports. TPP can help promote U.S. standards and bring consensus on the best approaches, creating opportunities for U.S. businesses and civil-society groups to participate as our TPP partners set standards and ensure that the tariff reductions we are negotiating in TPP are not undermined through discriminatory and burdensome standards.


*************** Chapter 9 ***************

--- Investment ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/c76dbd892f3a)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s chapter on Investment strengthens the rule of law in the Asia-Pacific region, deters foreign governments from imposing discriminatory or abusive requirements on American investors, and protects the right to regulate in the public interest. To this end, it ensures that American investors have effective remedies in the event of a breach of their rights, while reforming the investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) system by providing for tools to dismiss frivolous claims and instituting a range of other procedural and substantive safeguards.

Overview

Core Obligations

TPP’s Investment chapter includes a set of core obligations that provide basic protections in TPP markets for U.S. and other investors or investments — the same types of protections we already provide to foreign investors under U.S. law , including:

Providing for national treatment (i.e., treatment no less favorable than a TPP country provides, in like circumstances, to its own investors or investments); and most-favored-nation treatment (i.e., treatment no less favorable than a TPP country provides, in like circumstances, to another country’s foreign investors or investments).Providing a “minimum standard of treatment” for investments, defined narrowly based on customary international law, including protections against denial of justice and failure to provide police protection.Ensuring that if a TPP government expropriates an investment, it does so for a public purpose, in accordance with due process of law, and subject to prompt, adequate and fully realizable and transferable compensation.Allowing for transfer of funds related to an investment covered under the agreement — such as contributions to capital, transfers of profits and dividends, payments of interest or royalties, and payments under a contract — to be made freely and without delay, subject to exceptions. These exceptions ensure that governments retain the flexibility to manage volatile capital flows, including permitting countries to impose non-discriminating temporary safeguard measures (i.e., capital controls) restricting investment-related transfers in the context of a balance of payments crisis, and certain other economic crises, or in the context of prudential measures to protect the integrity and stability of the financial system.Barring specified “performance requirements,” including local content requirements, export requirements, and technology transfer or technology localization requirements.Ensuring investors have the ability to appoint senior managers without regard to nationality, and ensuring that any nationality-based restrictions on the appointment of board members do not impair an investor’s control over its investment.

Non-conforming measures

TPP countries have agreed to accept these core obligations on a “negative-list basis,” meaning that all obligations apply to all sectors and activities, apart from limitations negotiated and explicitly set out in a list of specific reservations describing the nature of any “non-conforming measures” that would be permissible even after the agreement enters into effect. These are recorded in two annexes:

Annex I contains a list of current measures that would otherwise violate one or more of the core obligations of the chapter, but which the country has determined that it needs to maintain. In listing a measure in Annex I, the country commits to a “standstill,” which ensures that the measure will not become more restrictive in the future, as well as a “ratchet,” which means that if the measure is amended in the future to become less restrictive, the new, more favorable treatment will set the benchmark for the standstill requirement.Annex II contains a list of reservations that enable a country to have full discretion to maintain existing non-conforming measures or adopt new restrictions without any limitation under the agreement.

Denial of Benefits

The Investment chapter allows a TPP Party to deny benefits to “shell companies” owned by persons of that Party or a non-Party that establishes in another TPP country in order to take advantage of treaty rights but that lack substantial business activities in that country. It also allows the denial of benefits to companies that invest in a TPP country, but are owned by persons of non-Parties with whom a TPP Party prohibits certain transactions, such as under sanctions regimes.

Investor-State Disputes

TPP investors will have the right to pursue neutral, international arbitration in the event of a dispute between an investor of a TPP Party and another TPP Party over a violation of one of the commitments of the Investment chapter. The chapter specifies these proceedings will be conducted in a transparent manner, with opportunities for public participation and safeguards to prevent abuse and help deter frivolous or otherwise non-meritorious claims. The safeguards include:

Transparency of arbitral proceedingsEnsuring that arbitration hearings and documents are open and available to the public. For investor-State cases against the United States under TPP, all submissions, hearing transcripts, and other key documents will be available on the U.S. State Department website.Amicus curiae submissionsEnsuring that interested stakeholders, including labor unions, civil society organizations and other interested stakeholders, can submit amicus curiae or “friend of the court” briefs.Non-disputing party submissionsEnsuring that an investor’s home government and other TPP Parties are able to make submissions to panels on the interpretation of the Agreement.Expedited review of frivolous claims and possible award of attorneys’ feesEnsuring, as under the U.S. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, that panels are able, on an expedited basis, to review and dismiss frivolous claims and award costs and attorneys’ fees to the respondent government.Interim review and award challengesEnsuring that disputing parties will be able to review and comment on proposed arbitral awards prior to their issuance, and to allow both disputing parties the option to challenge a tribunal award.Binding joint interpretationsEnsuring that TPP Parties, at any time, can agree on interpretations of the agreement that are binding on tribunals.Time limitsThe time period during which an investor can bring an investor-State claim is limited to three and a half years from the date of actual or constructive knowledge of an alleged breach.Claimant waiverTo prevent “forum shopping,” a claimant pursuing a claim in investor-State arbitration must waive the right to initiate parallel proceedings in other fora challenging the same measures

New Features

TPP’s Investment chapter includes innovations going beyond previous U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) to address new and emerging investment issues. These include obligations to address the growing problem of discriminatory measures that provide advantages to foreign SOEs, national champions, and others by forcing U.S. investors to favor another country’s domestic technology. They also include clarifications that TPP investment disciplines apply to SOEs and other persons exercising delegated government authority — whether delegated formally or informally — so that SOEs, acting on behalf of governments, cannot take actions that discriminate against foreign investors and then evade challenge by asserting that they are not covered by the disciplines of the agreement.

At the same time, the chapter includes stronger safeguards to close loopholes and to raise the standards of investor-State dispute settlement above virtually all of the other 3,200 plus investment-related agreements in effect around the world. These include underscoring that countries can regulate in the public interest, including on health, safety, financial stability, and environmental protection; expanding the rules discouraging and dismissing frivolous suits; clarifying that the claimant bears the burden to prove all elements of its claims; allowing governments to issue binding interpretations of the agreement; making proceedings fully open and transparent; and providing for the participation of civil society organizations and others parties not a direct party to the dispute. In addition, the chapter will for the first time clarify key concepts in the non-discrimination and minimum standard of treatment obligations, for example, clarifying the significance of legitimate public welfare objectives in the non-discrimination analysis and addressing the concern that frustrating investor expectations in and of itself could result in a minimum standard of treatment claim. The chapter will also require the Parties to provide detailed guidance on arbitrator ethics and issues of arbitrator independence and impartiality.

Explicit language underscoring right to regulate in the public interest.TPP includes new language underscoring that countries retain the right to regulate in the public interest, including to protect public health, safety, financial stability, and the environment. TPP will also include a separate, explicit recognition of health authorities’ right to adopt tobacco control measures in order to protect public health.Burden on claimant.A new provision in TPP clarifies that the claimant — the investor bringing the case against the government — bears the burden to prove all elements of its claims, including claims of breach of the minimum standard of treatment (MST) obligation, an obligation which guarantees investors due process and certain other protections in accordance with customary international law.Dismissal of frivolous claims.TPP expands existing rules discouraging frivolous suits by permitting governments to seek expedited review and dismissal of claims that are “manifestly without legal merit.”Investor “expectations” aren’t enough.TPP explicitly clarifies that an investor cannot win a claim for breach of the MST obligation merely by showing that a government measure frustrated its expectations (for example, its expectations of earning certain profits).Arbitrator ethics/code of conduct. TPP countries will establish a code of conduct for ISDS arbitrators that will provide additional guidance on issues of arbitrator independence and impartiality.

Impact

International investment is a key driver of U.S. economic growth, benefiting the entire U.S. economy by boosting exports of goods and services and supporting high-paying jobs in the United States. Today, the U.S. is the world’s largest destination for foreign direct investment (FDI), with an inward FDI stock of $5.4 trillion in 2014 (on a market value basis). We have been the largest recipient of FDI flows in 8 of the last 10 years. The foreign-based companies making these investments employed 5.8 million Americans in 2012, including 2.2 million in the manufacturing sector. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers and key natural resources outside the United States, investment abroad is often an important factor in supporting production at home in order to serve foreign customers and other purposes. U.S. companies with operations abroad employ 23 million Americans — roughly one private-sector worker in every five. These companies pay their workers 28 percent more on average than other private-sector jobs, and they account for nearly half of U.S. goods exports and 76 percent of U.S. research and development.

While valuable to U.S. workers and businesses, U.S. investments in other countries can encounter severe challenges. For example, since the 2000s, many countries — including in the Asia-Pacific — have begun experimenting with “forced localization” policies designed to force the transfer of technology, or deter investors from importing products from the United States by requiring purchase of local goods and services. In other cases, foreign governments have resorted to the full-scale expropriations of investment.

Investment protections have been a principal vehicle to guard against such policies in the Asia-Pacific and elsewhere. Over the last 50 years, 180 countries have negotiated over 3,200 agreements with investor protections. These provide assurance of basic rule of law protections and recourse to neutral, international arbitration in the event of an investment dispute.

Section A

Article 9.1: Definitions For the purposes of this Chapter:

Centre means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) established by the ICSID Convention;

claimant means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with another Party. If that investor is a natural person, who is a permanent resident of a Party and a national of another Party, that natural person may not submit a claim to arbitration against that latter Party;

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment in its territory of an investor of another Party in existence as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for those Parties or established, acquired, or expanded thereafter;

disputing parties means the claimant and the respondent;

disputing party means either the claimant or the respondent;

enterprise means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.3 (General Definitions), and a branch of an enterprise;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organised under the law of a Party, or a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business activities there;[1]

freely usable currency means “freely usable currency” as determined by the International Monetary Fund under its Articles of Agreement;

ICC Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the International Chamber of Commerce;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, done at Washington, March 18, 1965;

Inter-American Convention means the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, done at Panama, January 30, 1975;

investment means every asset that an investor owns or controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk. Forms that an investment may take include:

(a) an enterprise;

(b) shares, stock and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise;

(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments and loans;[2],[3]

(d) futures, options and other derivatives;

(e) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue-sharing and other similar contracts;

(f) intellectual property rights;

(g) licences, authorisations, permits and similar rights conferred pursuant to the Party’s law;[4] and

(h) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property, and related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens and pledges,

but investment does not mean an order or judgment entered in a judicial or administrative action.

investment agreement means a written agreement[5] that is concluded and takes effect after the date of entry into force of this Agreement[6] between an authority at the central level of government[7] of a Party and a covered investment or an investor of another Party and that creates an exchange of rights and obligations, binding on both parties under the law applicable under Article 9.24(2) (Governing Law), on which the covered investment or the investor relies in establishing or acquiring a covered investment other than the written agreement itself, and that grants rights to the covered investment or investor:

(a) with respect to natural resources that a national authority controls, such as oil, natural gas, rare earth minerals, timber, gold, iron ore and other similar resources,[8] including for their exploration, extraction, refining, transportation, distribution or sale;

(b) to supply services on behalf of the Party for consumption by the general public for: power generation or distribution, water treatment or distribution, telecommunications, or other similar services supplied on behalf of the Party for consumption by the general public;[9] or

(c) to undertake infrastructure projects, such as the construction of roads, bridges, canals, dams or pipelines or other similar projects; provided, however, that the infrastructure is not for the exclusive or predominant use and benefit of the government;

investment authorisation[10] means an authorisation that the foreign investment authority of a Party[11] grants to a covered investment or an investor of another Party;

investor of a non-Party means, with respect to a Party, an investor that attempts to make,[12] is making, or has made an investment in the territory of that Party, that is not an investor of a Party;

investor of a Party means a Party, or a national or an enterprise of a Party, that attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of another Party;

LCIA Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the London Court of International Arbitration;

negotiated restructuring means the restructuring or rescheduling of a debt instrument that has been effected through (a) a modification or amendment of that debt instrument, as provided for under its terms, or (b) a comprehensive debt exchange or other similar process in which the holders of no less than 75 per cent of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding debt under that debt instrument have consented to the debt exchange or other process;

New York Convention means the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958;

non-disputing Party means a Party that is not a party to an investment dispute;

protected information means confidential business information or information that is privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure under a Party’s law, including classified government information;

respondent means the Party that is a party to an investment dispute;

Secretary-General means the Secretary-General of ICSID; and

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

Article 9.2: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of another Party;

(b) covered investments; and

(c) with respect to Article 9.9 (Performance Requirements) and Article 9.15 (Investment and Environmental, Health and other Regulatory Objectives), all investments in the territory of that Party.

2. A Party’s obligations under this Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) the central, regional or local governments or authorities of that Party; and

(b) any person, including a state enterprise or any other body, when it exercises any governmental authority delegated to it by central, regional or local governments or authorities of that Party.[13]

3. For greater certainty, this Chapter shall not bind a Party in relation to an act or fact that took place or a situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

Article 9.3: Relation to Other Chapters

1. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

2. A requirement of a Party that a service supplier of another Party post a bond or other form of financial security as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to measures adopted or maintained by the Party relating to such cross-border supply of the service. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by the Party relating to the posted bond or financial security, to the extent that the bond or financial security is a covered investment.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party to the extent that they are covered by Chapter 11 (Financial Services).

Article 9.4: National Treatment[14]

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

3. For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regional level of government to investors, and to investments of investors, of the Party of which it forms a part.

Article 9.5: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any other Party or of any non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of investors of any other Party or of any non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

3. For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not encompass international dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms, such as those included in Section B.

Article 9.6: Minimum Standard of Treatment[15]

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with applicable customary international law principles, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the standard of treatment to be afforded to covered investments. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that which is required by that standard, and do not create additional substantive rights. The obligations in paragraph 1 to provide:

(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the principle of due process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world; and

(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of police protection required under customary international law.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there has been a breach of this Article.

4. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party takes or fails to take an action that may be inconsistent with an investor’s expectations does not constitute a breach of this Article, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a result.

5. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a subsidy or grant has not been issued, renewed or maintained, or has been modified or reduced, by a Party, does not constitute a breach of this Article, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a result.

Article 9.6bis: Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife

1. Notwithstanding Article 9.11.6(b) (Non-Conforming Measures), each Party shall accord to investors of another Party and to covered investments non-discriminatory treatment with respect to measures it adopts or maintains relating to losses suffered by investments in its territory owing to armed conflict or civil strife.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in a situation referred to in paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of another Party resulting from:

(a) requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces or authorities; or

(b) destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,

the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation or both, as appropriate, for that loss.

3. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to existing measures relating to subsidies or grants that would be inconsistent with Article 9.4 (National Treatment) but for Article 9.11.6(b) (Non-Conforming Measures).

Article 9.7: Expropriation and Compensation[16]

1. No Party shall expropriate or nationalise a covered investment either directly or indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalisation (expropriation), except:

(a) for a public purpose[17], [18];

(b) in a non-discriminatory manner;

(c) on payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4; and

(d) in accordance with due process of law.

2. Compensation shall:

(a) be paid without delay;

(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took place (the date of expropriation);

(c) not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended expropriation had become known earlier; and

(d) be fully realisable and freely transferable.

3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the compensation paid shall be no less than the fair market value on the date of expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency, accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

4. If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable, the compensation paid, converted into the currency of payment at the market rate of exchange prevailing on the date of payment, shall be no less than:

(a) the fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date; plus

(b) interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency, accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

5. This Article shall not apply to the issuance of compulsory licences granted in relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that the issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is consistent with Chapter 18 (Intellectual Property) and the TRIPS Agreement.[19]

6. For greater certainty, a Party’s decision not to issue, renew or maintain a subsidy or grant, or decision to modify or reduce a subsidy or grant,

(a) in the absence of any specific commitment under law or contract to issue, renew or maintain that subsidy or grant; or

(b) in accordance with any terms or conditions attached to the issuance, renewal, modification, reduction and maintenance of that subsidy or grant,

standing alone, does not constitute an expropriation.

Article 9.8: Transfers[20]

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) contributions to capital;[21]

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, management fees, technical assistance fees and other fees;

(c) proceeds from the sale of all or any part of the covered investment or from

the partial or complete liquidation of the covered investment;

(d) payments made under a contract, including a loan agreement;

(e) payments made pursuant to Article 9.6bis (Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife) and Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation); and

(f) payments arising out of a dispute.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers relating to a covered investment to be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3. Each Party shall permit returns in kind relating to a covered investment to be made as authorised or specified in a written agreement between the Party and a covered investment or an investor of another Party.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer through the equitable, non‑discriminatory and good faith application of its laws[22] relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) criminal or penal offences;

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities; or

(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative proceedings.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may restrict transfers of returns in kind in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict such transfers under this Agreement, including as set out in paragraph 4.

Article 9.9: Performance Requirements

1. No Party shall, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, impose or enforce any requirement, or enforce any commitment or undertaking:[23]

(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(c) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced in its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory;

(d) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with the investment;

(e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that the investment produces or supplies by relating those sales in any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings;

(f) to transfer a particular technology, a production process or other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory;

(g) to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party the goods that the investment produces or the services that it supplies to a specific regional market or to the world market;

(h) (i) to purchase, use or accord a preference to, in its territory, technology of the Party or of a person of the Party[24]; or

(ii) that prevents the purchase or use of, or the according of a preference to, in its territory, a particular technology; or

(i) to adopt:

(i) a given rate or amount of royalty under a licence contract; or

(ii) a given duration of the term of a licence contract,

in regard to any licence contract in existence at the time the requirement is imposed or enforced, or any commitment or undertaking is enforced, or any future licence contract[25] freely entered into between the investor and a person in its territory, provided that the requirement is imposed or the commitment or undertaking is enforced in a manner that constitutes direct interference with that licence contract by an exercise of non-judicial governmental authority of a Party. For greater certainty, paragraph 1(i) does not apply when the license contract is concluded between the investor and a Party.

2. No Party shall condition the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, on compliance with any requirement:

(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(b) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced in its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory;

(c) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with the investment; or

(d) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that the investment produces or supplies by relating those sales in any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings.

3. (a) Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, on compliance with a requirement to locate production, supply a service, train or employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.

(b) Paragraphs 1(f), 1(h) and 1(i) shall not apply:

(i) if a Party authorises use of an intellectual property right in accordance with Article 31[26] of the TRIPS Agreement, or to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary information that fall within the scope of, and are consistent with, Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement; or

(ii) if the requirement is imposed or the commitment or undertaking is enforced by a court, administrative tribunal or competition authority to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anticompetitive under the Party’s competition laws.[27], [28]

(c) Paragraph 1(i) shall not apply if the requirement is imposed or the commitment or undertaking is enforced by a tribunal as equitable remuneration under the Party’s copyright laws.

(d) Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, paragraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f), 2(a) and 2(b) shall not be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including environmental measures:

(i) necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with this Agreement;

(ii) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; or

(iii) related to the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources.

(e) Paragraphs 1(a), 1(b), 1(c), 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to qualification requirements for goods or services with respect to export promotion and foreign aid programs.

(f) Paragraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f), 1(g), 1(h), 1(i), 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to government procurement.

(g) Paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party relating to the content of goods necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or preferential quotas.

(h) Paragraphs (1)(h) and (1)(i) shall not be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or in a manner that constitutes a disguised restriction on international trade or investment.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed to prevent a Party, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, from imposing or enforcing a requirement, or enforcing a commitment or undertaking, to employ or train workers in its territory provided that the employment or training does not require the transfer of a particular technology, production process or other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory.

5. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to any commitment, undertaking or requirement other than those set out in those paragraphs.

6. This Article does not preclude enforcement of any commitment, undertaking or requirement between private parties, if a Party did not impose or require the commitment, undertaking or requirement.

Article 9.10: Senior Management and Boards of Directors

1. No Party shall require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment appoint to a senior management position a natural person of any particular nationality.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any committee thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment, be of a particular nationality or resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not materially impair the ability of the investor to exercise control over its investment.

Article 9.11: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 9.9 (Performance Requirements) and Article 9.10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at:

(i) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; or

(iii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 9.9 (Performance Requirements) or Article 9.10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors).[29]

2. Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 9.9 (Performance Requirements) and Article 9.10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors or activities, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. If a Party considers that a non-conforming measure applied by a regional level of government of another Party, as referred to in paragraph 1(a)(ii), creates a material impediment to investment in relation to the former Party, it may request consultations with regard to that measure. These Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging information on the operation of the measure and to considering whether further steps are necessary and appropriate.[30]

4. No Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party and covered by its Schedule to Annex II, require an investor of another Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.

5. (a) Article 9.4 (National Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that falls within an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations which are imposed by:

(i) Article 18.A.9 (General Provisions National Treatment); or

(ii) Article 3 of the TRIPS Agreement, if the exception or derogation relates to matters not addressed by Chapter 18 (Intellectual Property).

(b) Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that falls within Article 5 of the TRIPS Agreement, or an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations which are imposed by:

(i) Article 18.A.9 (General Provisions National Treatment); or

(ii) Article 4 of the TRIPS Agreement.

6. Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) and Article 9.10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to:

(a) government procurement; or

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance.

7. For greater certainty, any amendments or modifications to a Party’s Schedules to Annex I or Annex II, pursuant to this Article, shall be made in accordance with Article 30.2 (Amendments).

Article 9.12: Subrogation

If a Party, or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation designated by the Party, makes a payment to an investor of the Party under a guarantee, a contract of insurance or other form of indemnity that it has entered into with respect to a covered investment, the other Party in whose territory the covered investment was made shall recognise the subrogation or transfer of any rights the investor would have possessed under this Chapter with respect to the covered investment but for the subrogation, and the investor shall be precluded from pursuing these rights to the extent of the subrogation.

Article 9.13: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 9.4 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities in connection with a covered investment, such as a residency requirement for registration or a requirement that a covered investment be legally constituted under the laws or regulations of the Party, provided that these formalities do not materially impair the protections afforded by the Party to investors of another Party and covered investments pursuant to this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding Article 9.4 (National Treatment) and Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), a Party may require an investor of another Party or its covered investment to provide information concerning that investment solely for informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect such information that is confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the investor or the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the equitable and good faith application of its law.

Article 9.14: Denial of Benefits

1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of that investor if the enterprise:

(a) is owned or controlled by a person of a non-Party or of the denying Party; and

(b) has no substantial business activities in the territory of any Party other than the denying Party.

2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of that investor if persons of a non-Party own or control the enterprise and the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-Party or a person of the non-Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise or to its investments.

Article 9.15: Investment and Environmental, Health and other Regulatory Objectives

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting, maintaining or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this Chapter that it considers appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its territory is undertaken in a manner sensitive to environmental, health or other regulatory objectives.

Article 9.16: Corporate Social Responsibility

The Parties reaffirm the importance of each Party encouraging enterprises operating within its territory or subject to its jurisdiction to voluntarily incorporate into their internal policies those internationally recognised standards, guidelines and principles of corporate social responsibility that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party.

Section B: Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article 9.17: Consultation and Negotiation

1. In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and the respondent should initially seek to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of non-binding, third party procedures, such as good offices, conciliation or mediation.

2. The claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written request for consultations setting out a brief description of facts regarding the measure or measures at issue.

3. For greater certainty, the initiation of consultations and negotiations shall not be construed as recognition of the jurisdiction of the tribunal.

Article 9.18: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. If an investment dispute has not been resolved within six months of the receipt by the respondent of a written request for consultations pursuant to Article 9.17.2 (Consultation and Negotiation):

(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim:

(i) that the respondent has breached:

(A) an obligation under Section A;

(B) an investment authorisation;[31] or

(C) an investment agreement; and

(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a juridical person that the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim:

(i) that the respondent has breached:

(A) an obligation under Section A;

(B) an investment authorisation; or

(C) an investment agreement; and

(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach,

provided that a claimant may submit pursuant to subparagraph (a)(i)(C) or (b)(i)(C) a claim for breach of an investment agreement only if the subject matter of the claim and the claimed damages directly relate to the covered investment that was established or acquired, or sought to be established or acquired, in reliance on the relevant investment agreement.

2. When the claimant submits a claim pursuant to paragraph 1(a)(i)(B), 1(a)(i)(C), 1(b)(i)(B) or 1(b)(i)(C), the respondent may make a counterclaim in connection with the factual and legal basis of the claim or rely on a claim for the purpose of a set off against the claimant.[32]

3. At least 90 days before submitting any claim to arbitration under this Section, the claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written notice of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration (notice of intent). The notice shall specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, if a claim is submitted on behalf of an enterprise, the name, address and place of incorporation of the enterprise;

(b) for each claim, the provision of this Agreement, investment authorisation or investment agreement alleged to have been breached and any other relevant provisions;

(c) the legal and factual basis for each claim; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

4. The claimant may submit a claim referred to in paragraph 1 under one of the following alternatives:

(a) the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the respondent and the Party of the claimant are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the respondent or the Party of the claimant is a party to the ICSID Convention;

(c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or

(d) if the claimant and respondent agree, any other arbitral institution or any other arbitration rules.

5. A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section when the claimant’s notice of or request for arbitration (notice of arbitration):

(a) referred to in the ICSID Convention is received by the Secretary-General;

(b) referred to in the ICSID Additional Facility Rules is received by the Secretary-General;

(c) referred to in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with the statement of claim referred to therein, are received by the respondent; or

(d) referred to under any arbitral institution or arbitration rules selected under paragraph 4(d) is received by the respondent.

A claim asserted by the claimant for the first time after such notice of arbitration is submitted shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section on the date of its receipt under the applicable arbitration rules.

6. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 4 that are in effect on the date the claim or claims were submitted to arbitration under this Section shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this Agreement.

7. The claimant shall provide with the notice of arbitration:

(a) the name of the arbitrator that the claimant appoints; or

(b) the claimant’s written consent for the Secretary-General to appoint that arbitrator.

Article 9.19: Consent of Each Party to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under this Section in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent under paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to arbitration under this Section shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to the dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an “agreement in writing”; and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention for an “agreement”.

Article 9.20: Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party

1. No claim shall be submitted to arbitration under this Section if more than three years and six months have elapsed from the date on which the claimant first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged under Article 9.18.1 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) and knowledge that the claimant (for claims brought under Article 9.18.1(a)) or the enterprise (for claims brought under Article 9.18.1(b)) has incurred loss or damage.

2. No claim shall be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in this Agreement; and

(b) the notice of arbitration is accompanied:

(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 9.18.1(a) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), by the claimant’s written waiver; and

(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 9.18.1(b)(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), by the claimant’s and the enterprise’s written waivers,

of any right to initiate or continue before any court or administrative tribunal under the law of a Party, or any other dispute settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought under Article 9.18.1(a) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration)) and the claimant or the enterprise (for claims brought under Article 9.18.1(b)) may initiate or continue an action that seeks interim injunctive relief and does not involve the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or administrative tribunal of the respondent, provided that the action is brought for the sole purpose of preserving the claimant’s or the enterprise’s rights and interests during the pendency of the arbitration.

Article 9.21: Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the tribunal shall comprise three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing parties and the third, who shall be the presiding arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

2. The Secretary-General shall serve as appointing authority for an arbitration under this Section.

3. If a tribunal has not been constituted within a period of 75 days after the date that a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the Secretary-General, on the request of a disputing party, shall appoint, in his or her discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed. The Secretary-General shall not appoint a national of either the respondent or the Party of the claimant as the presiding arbitrator unless the disputing parties agree otherwise.

4. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Schedule C to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to an objection to an arbitrator on a ground other than nationality:

(a) the respondent agrees to the appointment of each individual member of a tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) a claimant referred to in Article 9.18.1(a) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or continue a claim, under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only on condition that the claimant agrees in writing to the appointment of each individual member of the tribunal; and

(c) a claimant referred to in Article 9.18.1(b) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or continue a claim, under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only on condition that the claimant and the enterprise agree in writing to the appointment of each individual member of the tribunal.

5. In the appointment of arbitrators to a tribunal for claims submitted under Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(B) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(B), Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(C) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(C), each disputing party shall take into account the expertise or relevant experience of particular candidates with respect to the relevant governing law under Article 9.24.2 (Governing Law). If the parties fail to agree on the appointment of the presiding arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall also take into account the expertise or relevant experience of particular candidates with respect to the relevant governing law under Article 9.24.2.

6. The Parties shall, prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, provide guidance on the application of the Code of Conduct for Dispute Settlement Proceedings under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) to arbitrators selected to serve on investor-State dispute settlement tribunals pursuant to this Article, including any necessary modifications to the Code of Conduct to conform to the context of investor-State dispute settlement. The Parties shall also provide guidance on the application of other relevant rules or guidelines on conflicts of interest in international arbitration. Arbitrators shall comply with that guidance in addition to the applicable arbitral rules regarding independence and impartiality of arbitrators.

Article 9.22: Conduct of the Arbitration

1. The disputing parties may agree on the legal place of any arbitration under the arbitration rules applicable under Article 9.18.4 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration). If the disputing parties fail to reach agreement, the tribunal shall determine the place in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place shall be in the territory of a State that is a party to the New York Convention.

2. A non-disputing Party may make oral and written submissions to the tribunal regarding the interpretation of this Agreement.

3. After consultation with the disputing parties, the tribunal may accept and consider written amicus curiae submissions regarding a matter of fact or law within the scope of the dispute that may assist the tribunal in evaluating the submissions and arguments of the disputing parties from a person or entity that is not a disputing party but has a significant interest in the arbitral proceedings. Each submission shall identify the author; disclose any affiliation, direct or indirect, with any disputing party; and identify any person, government or other entity that has provided, or will provide, any financial or other assistance in preparing the submission. Each submission shall be in a language of the arbitration and comply with any page limits and deadlines set by the tribunal. The tribunal shall provide the disputing parties with an opportunity to respond to such submissions. The tribunal shall ensure that the submissions do not disrupt or unduly burden the arbitral proceedings, or unfairly prejudice any disputing party.

4. Without prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other objections as a preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the competence of the tribunal, including an objection to the tribunal’s jurisdiction, a tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favour of the claimant may be made under Article 9.28 (Awards) or that a claim is manifestly without legal merit.

(a) An objection under this paragraph shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as possible after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial or, in the case of an amendment to the notice of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its response to the amendment.

(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has established for considering any other preliminary question, and issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph that a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favour of the claimant may be made under Article 9.28 (Awards), the tribunal shall assume to be true the claimant’s factual allegations in support of any claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and, in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in the relevant article of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection as to competence, including an objection to jurisdiction, or any argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph or make use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5.

5. In the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days after the tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an objection under paragraph 4 or any objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal’s competence, including an objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal’s jurisdiction. The tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits and issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor, no later than 150 days after the date of the request. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the tribunal may take an additional 30 days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing is requested, a tribunal may, on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its decision or award by an additional brief period, which may not exceed 30 days.

6. When the tribunal decides a respondent’s objection under paragraph 4 or 5, it may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In determining whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider whether either the claimant’s claim or the respondent’s objection was frivolous, and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

7. For greater certainty, if an investor of a Party submits a claim under this Section, including a claim alleging that a Party breached Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), the investor has the burden of proving all elements of its claims, consistent with general principles of international law applicable to international arbitration.

8. A respondent may not assert as a defence, counterclaim, right of set-off or for any other reason, that the claimant has received or will receive indemnification or other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract.

9. A tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or to ensure that the tribunal’s jurisdiction is made fully effective, including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party or to protect the tribunal’s jurisdiction. A tribunal may not order attachment or enjoin the application of a measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration). For the purposes of this paragraph, an order includes a recommendation.

10. In any arbitration conducted under this Section, at the request of a disputing party, a tribunal shall, before issuing a decision or award on liability, transmit its proposed decision or award to the disputing parties. Within 60 days after the tribunal transmits its proposed decision or award, the disputing parties may submit written comments to the tribunal concerning any aspect of its proposed decision or award. The tribunal shall consider any comments and issue its decision or award no later than 45 days after the expiration of the 60 day comment period.

11. In the event that an appellate mechanism for reviewing awards rendered by investor-State dispute settlement tribunals is developed in the future under other institutional arrangements, the Parties shall consider whether awards rendered under Article 9.28 (Awards) should be subject to that appellate mechanism. The Parties shall strive to ensure that any such appellate mechanism they consider adopting provides for transparency of proceedings similar to the transparency provisions established in Article 9.23 (Transparency of Arbitral Proceedings).

Article 9.23: Transparency of Arbitral Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent shall, after receiving the following documents, promptly transmit them to the non-disputing Parties and make them available to the public:

(a) the notice of intent;

(b) the notice of arbitration;

(c) pleadings, memorials and briefs submitted to the tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Article 9.22.2 (Conduct of the Arbitration) and Article 9.22.3 and Article 9.27 (Consolidation);

(d) minutes or transcripts of hearings of the tribunal, if available; and

(e) orders, awards and decisions of the tribunal.

2. The tribunal shall conduct hearings open to the public and shall determine, in consultation with the disputing parties, the appropriate logistical arrangements. If a disputing party intends to use information in a hearing that is designated as protected information or otherwise subject to paragraph 3 it shall so advise the tribunal. The tribunal shall make appropriate arrangements to protect such information from disclosure which may include closing the hearing for the duration of the discussion of that information.

3. Nothing in this Section, including paragraph 4(d), requires a respondent to make available to the public or otherwise disclose during or after the arbitral proceedings, including the hearing, protected information, or to furnish or allow access to information that it may withhold in accordance with Article 29.2 (Security Exceptions) or Article 29.6 (Disclosure of Information).[33]

4. Any protected information that is submitted to the tribunal shall be protected from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) subject to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the tribunal shall disclose to any non-disputing Party or to the public any protected information if the disputing party that provided the information clearly designates it in accordance with subparagraph (b);

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes protected information shall clearly designate the information according to any schedule set by the tribunal;

(c) a disputing party shall, according to any schedule set by the tribunal, submit a redacted version of the document that does not contain the protected information. Only the redacted version shall be disclosed in accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the tribunal, subject to paragraph 3, shall decide any objection regarding the designation of information claimed to be protected information. If the tribunal determines that the information was not properly designated, the disputing party that submitted the information may:

(i) withdraw all or part of its submission containing that information; or

(ii) agree to resubmit complete and redacted documents with corrected designations in accordance with the tribunal’s determination and subparagraph (c).

In either case, the other disputing party shall, whenever necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents which either remove the information withdrawn under subparagraph (d)(i) by the disputing party that first submitted the information or redesignate the information consistent with the designation under subparagraph (d)(ii) of the disputing party that first submitted the information.

5. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to withhold from the public information required to be disclosed by its laws. The respondent should endeavour to apply those laws in a manner sensitive to protecting from disclosure information that has been designated as protected information.

Article 9.24: Governing Law

1. Subject to paragraph 3, when a claim is submitted under Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(A) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(A), the tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.[34]­

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the other provisions of this Section, when a claim is submitted under Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(B) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(C), Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(B) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(C), the tribunal shall apply:

(a) the rules of law applicable to the pertinent investment authorisation or specified in the pertinent investment authorisation or investment agreement, or as the disputing parties may agree otherwise; or

(b) if, in the pertinent investment agreement the rules of law have not been specified or otherwise agreed:

(i) the law of the respondent, including its rules on the conflict of laws;[35] and

(ii) such rules of international law as may be applicable.

3. A decision of the Commission on the interpretation of a provision of this Agreement under Article 27.2.2(f) (Functions of the Commission) shall be binding on a tribunal, and any decision or award issued by a tribunal must be consistent with that decision.

Article 9.25: Interpretation of Annexes

1. If a respondent asserts as a defence that the measure alleged to be a breach is within the scope of a non-conforming measure set out in Annex I or Annex II, the tribunal shall, on request of the respondent, request the interpretation of the Commission on the issue. The Commission shall submit in writing any decision on its interpretation under Article 27.2.2(f) (Functions of the Commission) to the tribunal within 90 days of delivery of the request.

2. A decision issued by the Commission under paragraph 1 shall be binding on the tribunal, and any decision or award issued by the tribunal must be consistent with that decision. If the Commission fails to issue such a decision within 90 days, the tribunal shall decide the issue.

Article 9.26: Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other kinds of experts when authorised by the applicable arbitration rules, a tribunal, on request of a disputing party or, unless the disputing parties disapprove, on its own initiative, may appoint one or more experts to report to it in writing on any factual issue concerning scientific matters raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, subject to any terms and conditions that the disputing parties may agree.

Article 9.27: Consolidation

1. If two or more claims have been submitted separately to arbitration under Article 9.18.1 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) and the claims have a question of law or fact in common and arise out of the same events or circumstances, any disputing party may seek a consolidation order in accordance with the agreement of all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order or the terms of paragraphs 2 through 10.

2. A disputing party that seeks a consolidation order under this Article shall deliver, in writing, a request to the Secretary-General and to all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order and shall specify in the request:

(a) the names and addresses of all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order;

(b) the nature of the order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the order is sought.

3. Unless the Secretary-General finds within a period of 30 days after the date of receiving a request under paragraph 2 that the request is manifestly unfounded, a tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order agree otherwise, a tribunal established under this Article shall comprise three arbitrators:

(a) one arbitrator appointed by agreement of the claimants;

(b) one arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the Secretary-General, provided that the presiding arbitrator is not a national of the respondent or of a Party of any claimant.

5. If, within a period of 60 days after the date when the Secretary-General receives a request made under paragraph 2, the respondent fails or the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 4, the Secretary-General, on request of any disputing party sought to be covered by the order, shall appoint, in his or her discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed.

6. If a tribunal established under this Article is satisfied that two or more claims that have been submitted to arbitration under Article 9.18.1 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) have a question of law or fact in common, and arise out of the same events or circumstances, the tribunal may, in the interest of fair and efficient resolution of the claims, and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine together, all or part of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine one or more of the claims, the determination of which it believes would assist in the resolution of the others; or

(c) instruct a tribunal previously established under Article 9.21 (Selection of Arbitrators) to assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine together, all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that tribunal, on request of a claimant that was not previously a disputing party before that tribunal, shall be reconstituted with its original members, except that the arbitrator for the claimants shall be appointed pursuant to paragraphs 4(a) and 5; and

(ii) that tribunal shall decide whether a prior hearing shall be repeated.

7. If a tribunal has been established under this Article, a claimant that has submitted a claim to arbitration under Article 9.18.1 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) and that has not been named in a request made under paragraph 2 may make a written request to the tribunal that it be included in any order made under paragraph 6. The request shall specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant;

(b) the nature of the order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the order is sought.

The claimant shall deliver a copy of its request to the Secretary-General.

8. A tribunal established under this Article shall conduct its proceedings in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

9. A tribunal established under Article 9.21 (Selection of Arbitrators) shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or a part of a claim, over which a tribunal established or instructed under this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. On the application of a disputing party, a tribunal established under this Article, pending its decision under paragraph 6, may order that the proceedings of a tribunal established under Article 9.21 (Selection of Arbitrators) be stayed, unless the latter tribunal has already adjourned its proceedings.

Article 9.28: Awards

1. When a tribunal makes a final award, the tribunal may award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the respondent may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest in lieu of restitution.

2. For greater certainty, if an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Article 9.18.1(a) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), it may recover only for loss or damage that it has incurred in its capacity as an investor of a Party.

3. A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the disputing parties in connection with the arbitral proceeding, and shall determine how and by whom those costs and attorney’s fees shall be paid, in accordance with this Section and the applicable arbitration rules.

4. For greater certainty, for claims alleging the breach of an obligation under Section A with respect to an attempt to make an investment, when an award is made in favour of the claimant, the only damages that may be awarded are those that the claimant has proven were sustained in the attempt to make the investment, provided that the claimant also proves that the breach was the proximate cause of those damages. If the tribunal determines such claims to be frivolous, the tribunal may award to the respondent reasonable costs and attorney’s fees.

5. Subject to paragraph 1, if a claim is submitted to arbitration under Article 9.18.1(b) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) and an award is made in favour of the enterprise:

(a) an award of restitution of property shall provide that restitution be made to the enterprise;

(b) an award of monetary damages and any applicable interest shall provide that the sum be paid to the enterprise; and

(c) the award shall provide that it is made without prejudice to any right that any person may have under applicable domestic law with respect to the relief provided in the award.

6. A tribunal shall not award punitive damages.

7. An award made by a tribunal shall have no binding force except between the disputing parties and in respect of the particular case.

8. Subject to paragraph 8 and the applicable review procedure for an interim award, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with an award without delay.

9. A disputing party shall not seek enforcement of a final award until:

(a) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Convention:

(i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested revision or annulment of the award; or

(ii) revision or annulment proceedings have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, or the rules selected pursuant to Article 9.18.4(d) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration):

(i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has commenced a proceeding to revise, set aside or annul the award; or

(ii) a court has dismissed or allowed an application to revise, set aside or annul the award and there is no further appeal.

10. Each Party shall provide for the enforcement of an award in its territory.

11. If the respondent fails to abide by or comply with a final award, on delivery of a request by the Party of the claimant, a panel shall be established under Article 28.7 (Establishment of a Panel). The requesting Party may seek in those proceedings:

(a) a determination that the failure to abide by or comply with the final award is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement; and

(b) in accordance with Article 28.17 (Initial Report), a recommendation that the respondent abide by or comply with the final award.

12. A disputing party may seek enforcement of an arbitration award under the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention regardless of whether proceedings have been taken under paragraph 11.

13. A claim that is submitted to arbitration under this Section shall be considered to arise out of a commercial relationship or transaction for the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention.

Article 9.29: Service of Documents

Delivery of notice and other documents to a Party shall be made to the place named for that Party in Annex 9-D (Service of Documents on a Party Under Section B). A Party shall promptly make publicly available and notify the other Parties of any change to the place referred to in that Annex.

Annex 9-A

Customary International Law

The Parties confirm their shared understanding that “customary international law” generally and as specifically referenced in Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment) results from a general and consistent practice of States that they follow from a sense of legal obligation. The customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens refers to all customary international law principles that protect the investments of aliens.

Annex 9-B

Expropriation

The Parties confirm their shared understanding that:

1. An action or a series of actions by a Party cannot constitute an expropriation unless it interferes with a tangible or intangible property right or property interest in an investment.

2. Article 9.7.1 (Expropriation and Compensation) addresses two situations. The first is direct expropriation, in which an investment is nationalised or otherwise directly expropriated through formal transfer of title or outright seizure.

3. The second situation addressed by Article 9.7.1 (Expropriation and Compensation) is indirect expropriation, in which an action or series of actions by a Party has an effect equivalent to direct expropriation without formal transfer of title or outright seizure.

(a) The determination of whether an action or series of actions by a Party, in a specific fact situation, constitutes an indirect expropriation, requires a case-by-case, fact-based inquiry that considers, among other factors:

(i) the economic impact of the government action, although the fact that an action or series of actions by a Party has an adverse effect on the economic value of an investment, standing alone, does not establish that an indirect expropriation has occurred;

(ii) the extent to which the government action interferes with distinct, reasonable investment-backed expectations;[36] and

(iii) the character of the government action.

(b) Non-discriminatory regulatory actions by a Party that are designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as public health,[37] safety and the environment, do not constitute indirect expropriations, except in rare circumstances.

Annex 9-C

Expropriation Relating to Land

1. Notwithstanding the obligations under Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation), where Singapore is the expropriating Party, any measure of direct expropriation relating to land shall be for a purpose and upon payment of compensation at market value, in accordance with the applicable domestic legislation[38] and any subsequent amendments thereto relating to the amount of compensation where such amendments provide for the method of determination of the compensation which is no less favourable to the investor for its expropriated investment than such method of determination in the applicable domestic legislation as at the time of entry into force of this Agreement for Singapore.

2. Notwithstanding the obligations under Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation), where Viet Nam is the expropriating Party, any measure of direct expropriation relating to land shall be: (i) for a purpose in accordance with the applicable domestic legislation;[39] and (ii) upon payment of compensation equivalent to the market value, while recognising the applicable domestic legislation.

Annex 9-D

Service of Documents on a Party Under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement)

Australia

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Australia by delivery to:

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

R.G. Casey Building

John McEwen Crescent

Barton ACT 0221

Australia

Brunei Darussalam

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Brunei Darussalam by delivery to:

The Permanent Secretary (Trade)

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade

Jalan Subok

Bandar Seri Begawan, BD 2710

Brunei Darussalam

Canada

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Canada by delivery to:

Office of the Deputy Attorney General of Canada

Justice Building

239 Wellington Street

Ottawa, Ontario

K1A 0H8

Canada

Chile

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Chile by delivery to:

Dirección de Asuntos Jurídicos del Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de la República de Chile

Teatinos 180

Santiago

Chile

Japan

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Japan by delivery to:

Economic Affairs Bureau

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

2–2–1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku

Tokyo

Japan

Malaysia

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Malaysia by delivery to:

Attorney General’s Chambers

Level 16, No. 45 Persiaran Perdana

Precint 4

Federal Government Administrative Centre

62100 Putrajaya

Malaysia

Mexico

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Mexico by delivery to:

Dirección General de Consultoría Jurídica de Comercio Internacional

Alfonso Reyes #30, piso 17

Col. Hipódromo Condesa

Del. Cuauhtémoc

México D.F.

C.P. 06140

New Zealand

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on New Zealand by delivery to:

The Secretary

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade

195 Lambton Quay

Wellington 6011

New Zealand

Peru

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Peru by delivery to:

Dirección General de Asuntos de Economía Internacional,

Competencia y Productividad

Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas

Jirón Lampa 277, piso 5

Lima, Perú

Singapore

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Singapore by delivery to:

Permanent Secretary

Ministry of Trade & Industry

100 High Street #09–01

Singapore 179434

Singapore

United States

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on the United States by delivery to:

Executive Director (L/EX)

Office of the Legal Adviser

Department of State

Washington, D.C.20520

United States of America

Viet Nam

Notices and other documents in disputes under Section B shall be served on Viet Nam by delivery to:

General Director

Department of International Law

Ministry of Justice

60 Tran Phu Street

Ba Dinh District

Ha Noi

Viet Nam

Annex 9-E[40]

Transfers

Chile

1. Notwithstanding Article 9.8 (Transfers), Chile reserves the right of the Central Bank of Chile (Banco Central de Chile) to maintain or adopt measures in conformity with Law 18.840, Constitutional Organic Law of the Central Bank of Chile (Ley 18.840, Ley Orgánica Constitucional del Banco Central de Chile), and Decreto con Fuerza de Ley No3 de 1997, Ley General de Bancos (General Banking Act) and Ley 18.045, Ley de Mercado de Valores (Securities Market Law), in order to ensure currency stability and the normal operation of domestic and foreign payments. Such measures include, inter alia, the establishment of restrictions or limitations on current payments and transfers (capital movements) to or from Chile, as well as transactions related to them, such as requiring that deposits, investments or credits from or to a foreign country, be subject to a reserve requirement (encaje).

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the reserve requirements that the Central Bank of Chile can apply pursuant to Article 49 No. 2 of Law 18.840, shall not exceed 30 per cent of the amount transferred and shall not be imposed for a period which exceeds two years.

Annex 9-F

DL 600

Chile

1. The obligations and commitments contained in this Chapter do not apply to Decree Law 600, Foreign Investment Statute (Decreto Ley 600, Estatuto de la Inversión Extranjera) (hereinafter referred to in this Annex as “DL 600”), or its successors, and to Law 18.657, Foreign Capital Investment Fund Law (Ley 18.657, Ley de Fondos de Inversión de Capital Extranjero), with respect to:

(a) The right of the Foreign Investment Committee of Chile (Comité de Inversiones Extranjeras) or its successor to accept or reject applications to invest through an investment contract under DL 600[41] and the right to regulate the terms and conditions of foreign investment under DL 600 and Law 18.657.

(b) The right to maintain existing requirements that transfers from Chile of proceeds from the sale of all or any part of an investment of an investor of a Party or from the partial or complete liquidation of the investment which may not take place until a period not to exceed:

(i) in the case of an investment made pursuant to DL 600, one year from the date of transfer to Chile; or

(ii) in the case of an investment made pursuant to Law 18.657,[42] five years from the date of transfers to Chile.

(c) The right to adopt measures, consistent with this Annex, establishing future special voluntary investment programs in addition to the general regime for foreign investment in Chile, except that any such measures may restrict transfers from Chile of proceeds from the sale of all or any part of an investment of an investor of another Party or from the partial or complete liquidation of the investment for a period not to exceed five years from the date of transfer to Chile.

2. For greater certainty, except to the extent that paragraph 1(b) or (c) provides an exception to Article 9.8 (Transfers), the investment entered through an investment contract under DL 600, through Law 18.657 or through any future special voluntary investment program, will be subject to the obligations and commitments of this Chapter, to the extent that the investment is a covered investment under Chapter 9 (Investment).

Annex 9-G

Public Debt

1. The Parties recognise that the purchase of debt issued by a Party entails commercial risk. For greater certainty, no award shall be made in favour of a claimant for a claim under Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(A) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(A) with respect to default or non-payment of debt issued by a Party unless the claimant meets its burden of proving that such default or non-payment constitutes a breach of an obligation under Section A, including an uncompensated expropriation pursuant to Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation).

2. No claim that a restructuring of debt issued by a Party breaches an obligation under Section A shall be submitted to, or if already submitted continue in, arbitration under Section B if the restructuring is a negotiated restructuring at the time of submission, or becomes a negotiated restructuring after that submission, except for a claim that the restructuring violates Article 9.4 (National Treatment) or Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment).

3. Notwithstanding Article 9.18.4 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), and subject to paragraph 2, an investor of another Party shall not submit a claim under Section B that a restructuring of debt issued by a Party breaches an obligation under Section A, other than Article 9.4 (National Treatment) or Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), unless 270 days have elapsed from the date of receipt by the respondent of the written request for consultations pursuant to Article 9.17.2 (Consultation and Negotiation).[43]

Annex 9-H

1. A decision under Australia’s foreign investment policy, which consists of the Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act 1975, Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Regulations 1989, Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998 and associated Ministerial Statements by the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia or a minister acting on his or her behalf, on whether or not to approve a foreign investment proposal, shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) or Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement).

2. A decision by Canada following a review under the Investment Canada Act (R.S.C. 1985, c.28 (1st Supp.)), with respect to whether or not to permit an investment that is subject to review, shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) or Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement).

3. A decision by the National Commission on Foreign Investment (Comisión Nacional de Inversiones Extranjeras) following a review pursuant to Annex I, Mexico (Existing Measures), number 3, page 7 with respect to whether or not to permit an acquisition that is subject to review, shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions of Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) or Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement).

4. A decision under New Zealand’s Overseas Investment Act 2005 to grant consent, or to decline to grant consent, to an overseas investment transaction that requires prior consent under that Act shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) or Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement).

Annex 9-I

Non-Conforming Measures Ratchet Mechanism

Notwithstanding Article 9.11.1(c) (Non-Conforming Measures), for Viet Nam for three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it:

(a) Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article9.9 (Performance Requirements) and Article 9.10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 9.11.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed at the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam, with Articles 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 9.9 (Performance Requirements) or Article 9.10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors);

(b) Viet Nam shall not withdraw a right or benefit from an investor or covered investment of another Party, in reliance on which the investor or covered investment has taken any concrete action,[44] through an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 9.11.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) that decreases the conformity of the measure as it existed immediately before the amendment; and

(c) Viet Nam shall provide to the other Parties the details of any amendment to a non-conforming measure referred to in Article 9.11.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) that would decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, at least 90 days before making the amendment.

Annex 9-J

Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. An investor of a Party may not submit to arbitration under Section B a claim that Chile, Peru, Mexico or Viet Nam has breached an obligation under Section A either:

(a) on its own behalf under Article 9.18.1(a) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration); or

(b) on behalf of an enterprise of Chile, Peru, Mexico or Viet Nam, that is a juridical person that the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly under 9.18.1(b) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration),

if the investor or the enterprise, respectively, has alleged that breach of an obligation under Section A in proceedings before a court or administrative tribunal of Chile, Peru, Mexico or Viet Nam.

2. For greater certainty, if an investor of a Party elects to submit a claim of the type described in paragraph 1 to a court or administrative tribunal of Chile, Peru, Mexico or Viet Nam, that election shall be definitive and exclusive, and the investor may not thereafter submit the claim to arbitration under Section B.

Annex 9-K

Submission of Certain Claims for Three Years After Entry into Force

Malaysia

Without prejudice to a claimant’s right to submit other claims to arbitration pursuant to Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), Malaysia does not consent to the submission of a claim that Malaysia has breached a government procurement contract with a covered investment, below the specified contract value, for a period of three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Malaysia. The specified contract values are: (a) for goods, SDR 1,500,000; (b) for services, SDR 2,000,000; and (c) for construction, SDR 63,000,000.

Annex 9-L

Investment Agreements

A. Agreements with selected international arbitration clauses

1. An investor of a Party may not submit to arbitration a claim for breach of an investment agreement under Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(C) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(C) if the investment agreement provides the respondent’s consent for the investor to arbitrate the alleged breach of the investment agreement and further provides that:

(a) a claim may be submitted for breach of the investment agreement under at least one of the following alternatives:

(i) the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the respondent and the Party of the investor are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(ii) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the respondent or the Party of the investor is a party to the ICSID Convention;

(iii) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;

(iv) the ICC Arbitration Rules; or

(v) the LCIA Arbitration Rules; and

(b) in the case of arbitration not under the ICSID Convention, the legal place of the arbitration shall be:

(i) in the territory of a State that is party to the New York Convention; and

(ii) outside the territory of the respondent.

2. Notwithstanding Article 9.20.2(b) (Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party), if a claimant submits to arbitration a claim that the respondent has breached:

(a) an obligation under Section A pursuant to Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(A) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(A); or

(b) an investment authorisation pursuant to Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(B) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(B),

the claimant’s submission of a written waiver shall not preclude its right to initiate or continue an arbitration under an investment agreement, if that investment agreement meets the criteria in paragraph 1, with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 9.18.

3. If a claimant:

(a) submits to arbitration a claim that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A pursuant to Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(A) (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(A) or an investment authorisation pursuant to Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(B) or Article 9.18.1(b)(i)(B); and

(b) submits a claim to arbitration under an investment agreement that meets the criteria in paragraph 1, and the claims have a question of law or fact in common and arise out of the same events or circumstances,

any disputing party may seek a consolidation order in accordance with the agreement of all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order or the terms of paragraphs 2 through 10 of Article 9.27 (Consolidation).

B. Certain agreements between Peru and covered investments or investors[45]

1. Pursuant to Legislative Decrees 662 and 757, Peru may enter into agreements known as “stability agreements” with covered investments or investors of another Party.

2. As part of a stability agreement referred to in paragraph 1, Peru accords certain benefits to the covered investment or the investor that is a party to the agreement. These benefits typically include a commitment to maintain the existing income tax regime applicable to such covered investment or investor during a specified period of time.

3. A stability agreement referred to in paragraph 1 may constitute one of multiple written instruments that make up an “investment agreement”, as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions).[46] If that is the case, a breach of such a stability agreement by Peru may constitute a breach of the investment agreement of which it is a part.

4. If a stability agreement does not constitute one of multiple instruments that make up an “investment agreement”, as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions), a breach of such a stability agreement by Peru shall not constitute a breach of an investment agreement.

C. Limitation of Mexico’s consent to arbitration

1. Without prejudice to a claimant’s right to submit other claims pursuant to Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), Mexico does not consent to the submission of any claim to arbitration under Article 9.18.1(a)(i)(C) or 9.18.1(b)(i)(C) if the submission to arbitration of that claim would be inconsistent with the following laws with respect to the relevant acts of authority[47]:

(a) Hydrocarbons Law, Articles 20 and 21;

(b) Law on Public Works and Related Services, Article 98, paragraph 2;

(c) Public Private Partnerships Law, Article 139, paragraph 3;

(d) Law on Roads, Bridges, and Federal Motor Carriers, Article 80;

(e) Ports Law, Article 3, paragraph 2;

(f) Airports Law, Article 3, paragraph 2;

(g) Regulatory Law of the Railway Service, Article 4, paragraph 2;

(h) Commercial and Navigation Maritimes Law, Article 264, paragraph 2;

(i) Civil Aviation Law, Article 3, paragraph 2; and

(j) Political Constitution of the United Mexican States, Article 28, paragraph 20, Section VII, and Federal Telecommunications and Broadcasting Law, Article 312,

provided, however, that the application of the provisions referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (i) shall not be used as a disguised means to repudiate or breach the investment agreement.

2. If any law referred to in paragraph 1 is amended to permit the submission to arbitration of such a claim after the entry into force of this Agreement for Mexico, paragraph 1 shall not apply.[48]

D. Specific Canadian entities under subpart (c) of definition

For Canada, authority at the central level of government includes entities listed under Schedule III of the Financial Administration Act (R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11), and port or bridge authorities, that have concluded an investment agreement under subpart (c) of the definition of “investment agreement” only if the government directs or controls the day to day operations or activities of the entity or authority in carrying out its obligations under the investment agreement.

— — —

[1] For greater certainty, the inclusion of a “branch” in the definitions of “enterprise” and “enterprise of a Party” is without prejudice to a Party’s ability to treat a branch under its laws as an entity that has no independent legal existence and is not separately organised.

[2] Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures, and long-term notes, are more likely to have the characteristics of an investment, while other forms of debt, such as claims to payment that are immediately due and result from the sale of goods or services, are less likely to have such characteristics.

[3] A loan issued by one Party to another Party is not an investment.

[4] Whether a particular type of licence, authorisation, permit or similar instrument (including a concession to the extent that it has the nature of such an instrument) has the characteristics of an investment depends on such factors as the nature and extent of the rights that the holder has under the Party’s law. Among such instruments that do not have the characteristics of an investment are those that do not create any rights protected under the Party’s law. For greater certainty, the foregoing is without prejudice to whether any asset associated with such instruments has the characteristics of an investment.

[5] “Written agreement” refers to an agreement in writing, negotiated and executed by both parties, whether in a single instrument or in multiple instruments. For greater certainty:

(a) a unilateral act of an administrative or judicial authority, such as a permit, licence, authorisation, certificate, approval, or similar instrument issued by a Party in its regulatory capacity, or a subsidy or grant, or a decree, order or judgment, standing alone; and

(b) an administrative or judicial consent decree or order,

shall not be considered a written agreement.

[6] For greater certainty, a written agreement that is concluded and takes effect after the entry into force of this Agreement does not include the renewal or extension of an agreement in accordance with the provisions of the original agreement, and on the same or substantially the same terms and conditions as the original agreement, which has been concluded and entered in force prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

[7] For the purposes of this definition, “authority at the central level of government” means, for unitary states, an authority at the ministerial level of government. Ministerial level of government means government departments, ministries or other similar authorities at the central level of government, but does not include: (a) a governmental agency or organ established by a Party’s constitution or a particular legislation that has a separate legal personality from government departments, ministries or other similar authorities under a Party’s law, unless the day to day operations of that agency or organ are directed or controlled by government departments, ministries or other similar authorities; or (b) a governmental agency or organ that acts exclusively with respect to a particular region or province.

[8] For the avoidance of doubt, this subparagraph does not include an investment agreement with respect to land, water or radio spectrum.

[9] For the avoidance of doubt, this subparagraph does not cover correctional services, healthcare services, education services, childcare services, welfare services or other similar social services.

[10] For greater certainty, the following are not encompassed within this definition: (i) actions taken by a Party to enforce laws of general application, such as competition, environmental, health or other regulatory laws; (ii) non-discriminatory licensing regimes; and (iii) a Party’s decision to grant to a covered investment or an investor of another Party a particular investment incentive or other benefit, that is not provided by a foreign investment authority in an investment authorisation.

[11] For the purposes of this definition, “foreign investment authority” means, as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement: (a) for Australia, the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia under Australia’s foreign investment policy including the Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act 1975; (b) for Canada, the Minister of Industry, but only when issuing a notice under Section 21 or 22 of the Investment Canada Act; (c) for Mexico, the National Commission of Foreign Investments (Comisión Nacional de Inversiones Extranjeras); and (d) for New Zealand, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Fisheries or the Minister for Land Information, to the extent that they make a decision to grant consent under the Overseas Investment Act 2005.

[12] For greater certainty, the Parties understand that, for the purposes of the definitions of “investor of a non-Party” and “investor of a Party”, an investor “attempts to make” an investment when that investor has taken concrete action or actions to make an investment, such as channelling resources or capital in order to set up a business, or applying for a permit or licence.

[13] For greater certainty, governmental authority is delegated under the Party’s law, including through a legislative grant or a government order, directive or other action transferring or authorising the exercise of governmental authority.

[14] For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 9.4 (National Treatment) or Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between investors or investments on the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.

[15] Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment) shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 9-A (Customary International Law).

[16] Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation) shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 9-B (Expropriation) and is subject to Annex 9-C (Expropriation Relating to Land).

[17] For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, the term “public purpose” refers to a concept in customary international law. Domestic law may express this or a similar concept by using different terms, such as “public necessity”, “public interest” or “public use”.

[18] For the avoidance of doubt: (i) if Brunei Darussalam is the expropriating Party, any measure of direct expropriation relating to land shall be for the purposes as set out in the Land Code (Cap. 40) and the Land Acquisition Act (Cap. 41), as of the date of entry into force of the Agreement for it; and (ii) if Malaysia is the expropriating Party, any measure of direct expropriation relating to land shall be for the purposes as set out in the Land Acquisitions Act 1960, Land Acquisition Ordinance 1950 of the State of Sabah and the Land Code 1958 of the State of Sarawak, as of the date of entry into force of the Agreement for it.

[19] For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that, for the purposes of this Article, the term “revocation” of intellectual property rights includes the cancellation or nullification of those rights, and the term “limitation” of intellectual property rights includes exceptions to those rights.

[20] For greater certainty, this Article is subject to Annex 9-E (Transfers).

[21] For greater certainty, contributions to capital include the initial contribution.

[22] For greater certainty, this Article does not preclude the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of a Party’s laws relating to its social security, public retirement or compulsory savings programmes.

[23] For greater certainty, a condition for the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage referred to in paragraph 2 does not constitute a “requirement” or a “commitment or undertaking” for the purposes of paragraph 1.

[24] For the purposes of this Article, the term “technology of the Party or of a person of the Party” includes technology that is owned by the Party or a person of the Party, and technology for which the Party or a person of the Party holds, an exclusive licence.

[25] A “licence contract” referred to in this subparagraph means any contract concerning the licensing of technology, a production process, or other proprietary knowledge.

[26] The reference to “Article 31” includes any waiver or amendment to the TRIPS Agreement implementing paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/MIN (01)/DEC/2).

[27] The Parties recognise that a patent does not necessarily confer market power.

[28] In the case of Brunei Darussalam, for a period of 10 years after the entry into force of this Agreement for it or until it establishes a competition authority or authorities, whichever occurs earlier, the reference to the Party’s competition laws includes competition regulations.

[29] With respect to Viet Nam, Annex 9-I (Non-Conforming Measures Ratchet Mechanism) applies.

[30] For greater certainty, any Party may request consultations with another Party regarding a non-conforming measure applied by a central level of government, as referred to in paragraph 1(a)(i).

[31] Without prejudice to a claimant’s right to submit to arbitration other claims under this Article, a claimant shall not submit to arbitration a claim under subparagraph (a)(i)(B) or subparagraph (b)(i)(B) that a Party covered by Annex 9-H has breached an investment authorisation by enforcing conditions or requirements under which the investment authorisation was granted.

[32] In the case of investment authorisations, this paragraph shall apply only to the extent that the investment authorisation, including instruments executed after the date the authorisation was granted, creates rights and obligations for the disputing parties.

[33] For greater certainty, when a respondent chooses to disclose to the tribunal information that may be withheld in accordance with Article 29.2 (Security Exceptions) or Article 29.6 (Disclosure of Information), the respondent may still withhold that information from disclosure to the public.

[34] For greater certainty, this provision is without prejudice to any consideration of the domestic law of the respondent when it is relevant to the claim as a matter of fact.

[35] The “law of the respondent” means the law that a domestic court or tribunal of proper jurisdiction would apply in the same case. For greater certainty, the law of the respondent includes the relevant law governing the investment agreement or investment authorisation, including law on damages, mitigation, interest and estoppel.

[36] For greater certainty, whether an investor’s investment-backed expectations are reasonable depends, to the extent relevant, on factors such as whether the government provided the investor with binding written assurances and the nature and extent of governmental regulation or the potential for government regulation in the relevant sector.

[37] For greater certainty and without limiting the scope of this subparagraph, regulatory actions to protect public health include, among others, such measures with respect to the regulation, pricing and supply of, and reimbursement for, pharmaceuticals (including biological products), diagnostics, vaccines, medical devices, gene therapies and technologies, health-related aids and appliances and blood and blood‑related products.

[38] The applicable domestic legislation is the Land Acquisition Act (Cap. 152) as at the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Singapore.

[39] The applicable domestic legislation is Viet Nam’s Land Law, Law No. 45/2013/QH13 and Decree 44/2014/ND-CP Regulating Land Prices, as at the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam.

[40] For greater certainty, this Annex shall apply to transfers covered by Article 9.8 (Transfers) and payments and transfers covered by Article 10.12 (Payments and Transfers).

[41] The authorisation and execution of an investment contract under DL 600 by an investor of a Party or a covered investment does not create any right on the part of the investor or the covered investment to engage in particular activities in Chile.

[42] Law 18.657 was derogated on May 1, 2014 by law 20.712. The transfer requirement established under subparagraph (b)(ii) will only be applicable to investments made pursuant to Law 18.657 prior to May 1, 2014 and not to investments made pursuant to Law 20.712.

[43] Paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Annex do not apply to any claim under Section B against Singapore or the United States.

[44] Concrete action includes the channelling of resources or capital in order to establish or expand a business and applying for permits and licences.

[45] The fact that this Annex addresses only agreements entered into by Peru shall not prejudice the determination by a tribunal established under Section B regarding whether an agreement entered into by the government of another Party meets the definition of “investment agreement” in Article 9.1 (Definitions).

[46] For greater certainty, for multiple written instruments to make up an “investment agreement”, as defined in Article 9.1 (Definition), one or more of those instruments must grant rights to the covered investment or the investor as defined in subparagraph (a), (b) or (c) of that definition. A stability agreement may constitute one of multiple written instruments that make up an “investment agreement” even if the stability agreement is not itself the instrument in which such rights are granted.

[47] For greater certainty, the term “act of authority” includes omissions.

[48] For greater certainty, when any law referred to in paragraph 1 is amended consistent with paragraph 2, any subsequent amendment of that law may not re-establish the applicability of paragraph 1.


*************** Chapter 10 ***************

--- Cross Border Trade in Services ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/2e3bdad73583)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

Tradable services such as software, R&D, cloud-based computer services, engineering and architecture, logistics and express delivery account for about a third of all U.S. exports, and the U.S. runs a global services trade surplus of more than $230 billion as of 2014. TPP’s Cross-Border Trade in Services chapter will open markets for American exporters of these products, ensure fair and transparent regulatory treatment for Americans seeking to provide services abroad, and bar requirements that Americans invest in a TPP country in order to provide services there. This will foster an open Asia-Pacific services environment that helps American workers and businesses take advantage of one of our country’s signal strengths.

Overview

Core obligations

The Cross-Border Trade in Services chapter includes four core obligations found in all U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) (subject to country-specific exceptions that must be negotiated and agreed): (1) national treatment, providing that no country shall discriminate in favor of its own suppliers; (2) most-favored nation treatment, which provides that no country shall discriminate in favor of one TPP country over another TPP country, or a non-TPP country; (3) market access, which provides that no country may impose quantitative restrictions on the supply of services (e.g., a limit on the number of suppliers or number of transactions) or require a specific type of legal entity or joint venture; and (4) local presence, which provides that no country may require a supplier from another country to establish an office or affiliate, or to be resident, in its territory in order to supply the service.

Non-conforming measures

TPP countries have agreed to accept these core obligations on a “negative-list basis.” This means, for all countries, full access to their markets, apart from those sectors included in a country-specific list of specific reservations describing the nature of any “non-conforming measures” permissible even after the agreement enters into effect. These reservations are recorded in two annexes to the agreement:

Annex I contains a list of current measures that would otherwise violate one or more of the chapter’s core obligations, but which the country has determined that it needs to maintain in force. In listing a measure in Annex I, the country commits to a “standstill,” which ensures that the measure will not become more restrictive in the future, as well as a “ratchet,” which means that if the measure is amended in the future to become less restrictive, the new, more favorable treatment will set the benchmark for the standstill requirement.Annex II contains a list of reservations that enable a country to have full discretion to maintain existing non-conforming measures or adopt new restrictions without any consequence under the agreement.

Domestic regulation

The chapter ensures that TPP Parties develop and administer measures of general application, including licensing processes, in a fair and reasonable manner, while fully recognizing the right to regulate and to introduce new regulations.

Transparency

The chapter sets certain requirements for transparency in the development of new services regulations, including establishing mechanisms for responding to stakeholder inquiries on regulations related to the chapter; processes for notice and comment on new regulations; and allowing for reasonable time between publication of final regulations and their effective date.

Recognition

The chapter ensures that TPP Parties have the flexibility to recognize the credentials of service suppliers of another Party without needing to recognize those of all Parties.

Denial of benefits

The chapter ensures that a TPP Party can deny benefits to a TPP supplier owned or controlled by an entity from a non-TPP country in cases where either the Party has sanctions on the non-TPP country, or where the TPP supplier is only a shell company for the non-TPP entity.

Payments and transfers

The chapter allows for transfer of funds related to the cross-border supply of services to be made freely and without delay, subject to exceptions. These exceptions ensure that governments retain the flexibility to take measures, including non-discriminating temporary safeguard measures such as capital controls, in the context of economic crisis, or to take prudential measures to protect the integrity and stability of the financial system.

Annexes

In addition to an annex covering specific exceptions, the Cross-Border Trade in Services chapter includes two annexes on specific sectors:

Professional servicesA professional services annex to encourage cooperative work on licensing recognition and other regulatory issues in order to enhance opportunities for trade in professional services.Express Delivery ServicesAn annex on express delivery services to address the unique challenges private suppliers face when competing with national postal entities in express delivery.

New Features

The Cross-Border Trade in Services chapter builds on the coverage and quality of services commitments under recent U.S. FTAs — which in turn build on those guaranteed by the World Trade Organization (WTO) — including new commitments that address longstanding issues for U.S. services suppliers. In addition, it includes:

Express Delivery Services Annex

The enhanced disciplines for express delivery services help ensure fair competition in a sector in which private suppliers often compete with government-owned or government-authorized postal monopolies. These enhancements, consistent with the U.S. Postal Accountability and Enforcement Act of 2006, support TPP initiatives for small and medium-sized enterprises, which are often highly dependent on express delivery services for integration into global supply chains and distribution networks.

Domestic regulations

The process of applying for authorization to supply a service should be as fair and transparent in other TPP markets as it is in the United States. To this end, the chapter includes new good-governance guidelines — based on U.S. practice — for providing processing timelines, informing applicants of their status, charging application fees, and other application issues.

Impact

Services account for the majority of U.S. and world economic output. In the United States, the services sector supports 4 out of 5 jobs. [1] Services, including information and communication services, transportation and logistics, wholesale and retail services, energy services, health care, entertainment, software, and professional services, are important contributors to growth and productivity in the U.S. and global economies.

Increased services trade has the potential to significantly help the U.S. economy. America is already the world’s largest services trading nation, with approximately $711 billion in exports and $477 billion in imports in 2014. Looking ahead, the Internet is making cross-border exports of services easier than ever before, as the user population grows and telecommunications prices fall. This means the U.S. has remarkable prospects both in traditional services exports, and in new ones like the many new health, education, business, and entertainment services developed every year as smartphone “apps.” The number of export-supported, high wage services jobs — with trade barriers reduced — is thus poised to grow significantly.

But even for the United States, services trade is far lower than it might be. Despite already accounting for a significant portion of U.S. and world economic output, services industries account for only about 20 percent of world exports and 30 percent of American exports. This reflects the fact that services trade is hampered by complex restrictions and bans on access that have a significant impact on global trade in services. [2] While affecting American exports in general, they often disproportionately hurt small businesses and push American businesses to move abroad rather than export from home. Examples include:

Requirements that a U.S. business establish an office overseas before it can supply a service. This hits small businesses much harder than larger firms, given the expense necessary to set up foreign offices, and more fundamentally tilts business choices towards foreign investment over exports and employment within the United States.Markets restricted to government monopolies or tilted by favoritism toward a government monopoly provider, often found in industries such as transport and logistics.Regulatory systems which favor domestic firms, are opaque, or otherwise reduce export opportunities without achieving particular valid policy goals.Prohibitions on cross-border provision of legitimate ‘content,’ such as videos or music.

By addressing these issues in some of the fastest-growing markets in the world, TPP will create generation-long opportunities for growth and support for high-wage jobs.

[1] United States International Trade Commission, Recent Trends in U.S. Services Trade, 2014 Annual Report. http://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4463.pdf

[2] World Trade Organization, World Trade Report 2012. https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/wtr12_e.htm

Article 10.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

airport operation services means the supply of air terminal, airfield and other airport infrastructure operation services on a fee or contract basis. Airport operation services do not include air navigation services;

computer reservation system services means services provided by computerised systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and fare rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of another Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party to a person of another Party; or

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of another Party,

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a covered investment;

enterprise means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.3 (General Definitions), and a branch of an enterprise;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organised under the laws of a Party, or a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business activities there;

ground handling services means the supply at an airport, on a fee or contract basis, of the following services: airline representation, administration and supervision; passenger handling; baggage handling; ramp services; catering, except the preparation of the food; air cargo and mail handling; fuelling of an aircraft; aircraft servicing and cleaning; surface transport; and flight operations, crew administration and flight planning. Ground handling services do not include: self-handling; security; line maintenance; aircraft repair and maintenance; or management or operation of essential centralised airport infrastructure, such as de-icing facilities, fuel distribution systems, baggage handling systems and fixed intra-airport transport systems;

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) central, regional, or local governments or authorities; or

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional, or local governments or authorities;

selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the air carrier concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of marketing such as market research, advertising and distribution. These activities do not include the pricing of air transport services or the applicable conditions;

service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means, for each Party, any service that is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more service suppliers;

service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that seeks to supply or supplies a service; and

specialty air services means any specialised commercial operation using an aircraft whose primary purpose is not the transportation of goods or passengers, such as aerial fire-fighting, flight training, sightseeing, spraying, surveying, mapping, photography, parachute jumping, glider towing, and helicopter-lift for logging and construction, and other airborne agricultural, industrial and inspection services.

Article 10.2: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting cross-border trade in services by service suppliers of another Party. Such measures include measures affecting:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale or delivery of a service;

(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) the access to and use of distribution, transport or telecommunications networks and services in connection with the supply of a service;

(d) the presence in the Party’s territory of a service supplier of another Party; and

(e) the provision of a bond or other form of financial security as a condition for the supply of a service.

2. In addition to paragraph 1:

(a) Article 10.5 (Market Access), Article 10.8 (Domestic Regulation) and Article 10.11 (Transparency) shall also apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting the supply of a service in its territory by a covered investment[1]; and

(b) Annex 10-B (Express Delivery Services) shall also apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting the supply of express delivery services, including by a covered investment.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) financial services as defined in Article 11.1 (Definitions), except that paragraph 2(a) shall apply if the financial service is supplied by a covered investment that is not a covered investment in a financial institution as defined in Article 11.1 (Definitions) in the Party’s territory;

(b) government procurement;

(c) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority; or

(d) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance.

4. This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of another Party who seeks access to its employment market or who is employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not confer any right on that national with respect to that access or employment.

5. This Chapter shall not apply to air services, including domestic and international air transportation services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, or to related services in support of air services, other than the following:

(a) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from service, excluding so-called line maintenance;

(b) selling and marketing of air transport services;

(c) computer reservation system services;

(d) specialty air services;

(e) airport operation services; and

(f) ground handling services.

6. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and a bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral air services agreement to which two or more Parties are party, the air services agreement shall prevail in determining the rights and obligations of those Parties that are party to that air services agreement.

7. If two or more Parties have the same obligations under this Agreement and a bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral air services agreement, those Parties may invoke the dispute settlement procedures of this Agreement only after any dispute settlement procedures in the other agreement have been exhausted.

8. If the Annex on Air Transport Services of GATS is amended, the Parties shall jointly review any new definitions with a view to aligning the definitions in this Agreement with those definitions, as appropriate.

Article 10.3: National Treatment[2]

1. Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of another Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own services and service suppliers.

2. For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regional level of government to service suppliers of the Party of which it forms a part.

Article 10.4: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of another Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to services and service suppliers of any other Party or a non-Party.

Article 10.5: Market Access

No Party shall adopt or maintain, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, measures that:

(a) impose limitations on:

(i) the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii) the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;[3] or

(iv) the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or

(b) restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service supplier may supply a service.

Article 10.6: Local Presence

No Party shall require a service supplier of another Party to establish or maintain a representative office or any form of enterprise, or to be resident, in its territory as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.

Article 10.7: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access) and Article 10.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at:

(i) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; or

(iii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access) or Article 10.6 (Local Presence).[4]

2. Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access) and Article 10.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-sectors or activities, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. If a Party considers that a non-conforming measure applied by a regional level of government of another Party, as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(ii), creates a material impediment to the cross-border supply of services in relation to the former Party, it may request consultations with regard to that measure. These Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging information on the operation of the measure and to considering whether further steps are necessary and appropriate.[5]

Article 10.8: Domestic Regulation

1. Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, while recognising the right to regulate and to introduce new regulations on the supply of services in order to meet its policy objectives, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that any such measures that it adopts or maintains are:

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to supply the service; and

(b) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the supply of the service.

3. In determining whether a Party is in conformity with its obligations under paragraph 2, account shall be taken of international standards of relevant international organisations applied by that Party.[6]

4. If a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a service, it shall ensure that its competent authorities:

(a) within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application considered complete under its laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision concerning the application;

(b) to the extent practicable, establish an indicative timeframe for the processing of an application;

(c) if an application is rejected, to the extent practicable, inform the applicant of the reasons for the rejection, either directly or on request, as appropriate;

(d) on request of the applicant, provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status of the application;

(e) to the extent practicable, provide the applicant with the opportunity to correct minor errors and omissions in the application and endeavour to provide guidance on the additional information required; and

(f) if they deem appropriate, accept copies of documents that are authenticated in accordance with the Party’s laws in place of original documents.

5. Each Party shall ensure that any authorisation fee charged by any of its competent authorities is reasonable, transparent and does not, in itself, restrict the supply of the relevant service.[7]

6. If licensing or qualification requirements include the completion of an examination, each Party shall ensure that:

(a) the examination is scheduled at reasonable intervals; and

(b) a reasonable period of time is provided to enable interested persons to submit an application.

7. Each Party shall ensure that there are procedures in place domestically to assess the competency of professionals of another Party.

8. Paragraphs 1 through 7 shall not apply to the non-conforming aspects of measures that are not subject to the obligations under Article 10.3 (National Treatment) or Article 10.5 (Market Access) by reason of an entry in a Party’s Schedule to Annex I, or to measures that are not subject to the obligations under Article 10.3 (National Treatment) or Article 10.5 (Market Access) by reason of an entry in a Party’s Schedule to Annex II.

9. If the results of the negotiations related to paragraph 4 of Article VI of GATS, or the results of any similar negotiations undertaken in other multilateral fora in which the Parties participate, enter into effect, the Parties shall jointly review these results with a view to bringing them into effect, as appropriate, under this Agreement.

Article 10.9: Recognition

1. For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of a Party’s standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, it may recognise the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of another Party or a non-Party. That recognition, which may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or arrangement with the Party or non-Party concerned, or may be accorded autonomously.

2. If a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement, the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted, in the territory of another Party or a non-Party, nothing in Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed to require the Party to accord recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted, in the territory of any other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate opportunity to another Party, on request, to negotiate its accession to that agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement. If a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity to another Party to demonstrate that education, experience, licences or certifications obtained or requirements met in that other Party’s territory should be recognised.

4. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner that would constitute a means of discrimination between Parties or between Parties and non-Parties in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in services.

5. As set out in Annex 10-A (Professional Services), the Parties shall endeavour to facilitate trade in professional services, including through the establishment of a Professional Services Working Group.

Article 10.10: Denial of Benefits

1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of another Party if the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party, and the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-Party or a person of the non-Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise.

2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of another Party if the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party or by persons of the denying Party that has no substantial business activities in the territory of any Party other than the denying Party.

Article 10.11: Transparency

1. Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for responding to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations that relate to the subject matter of this Chapter.[8]

2. If a Party does not provide advance notice and opportunity for comment pursuant to Article 26.2.2 (Publication) with respect to regulations that relate to the subject matter in this Chapter, it shall, to the extent practicable, provide in writing or otherwise notify interested persons of the reasons for not doing so.

3. To the extent possible, each Party shall allow reasonable time between publication of final regulations and the date when they enter into effect.

Article 10.12: Payments and transfers[9]

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments that relate to the cross-border supply of services to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers and payments that relate to the cross-border supply of services to be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange that prevails at the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer or payment through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws[10] that relate to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal or penal offences; or

(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative proceedings.

Article 10.13: Other Matters

The Parties recognise the importance of air services in facilitating the expansion of trade and enhancing economic growth. Each Party may consider working with other Parties in appropriate fora toward liberalising air services, such as through agreements allowing air carriers to have flexibility to decide on their routing and frequencies.

Annex 10-A

Professional Services

General Provisions

1. Each Party shall consult with relevant bodies in its territory to seek to identify professional services when two or more Parties are mutually interested in establishing dialogue on issues that relate to the recognition of professional qualifications, licensing or registration.

2. Each Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to establish dialogues with the relevant bodies of other Parties, with a view to recognising professional qualifications, and facilitating licensing or registration procedures.

3. Each Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to take into account agreements that relate to professional services in the development of agreements on the recognition of professional qualifications, licensing and registration.

4. A Party may consider, if feasible, taking steps to implement a temporary or project specific licensing or registration regime based on a foreign supplier’s home licence or recognised professional body membership, without the need for further written examination. That temporary or limited licence regime should not operate to prevent a foreign supplier from gaining a local licence once that supplier satisfies the applicable local licensing requirements.

Engineering and Architectural Services

5. Further to paragraph 3, the Parties recognise the work in APEC to promote the mutual recognition of professional competence in engineering and architecture, and the professional mobility of these professions, under the APEC Engineer and APEC Architect frameworks.

6. Each Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to work towards becoming authorised to operate APEC Engineer and APEC Architect Registers.

7. A Party shall encourage its relevant bodies operating APEC Engineer or APEC Architect Registers to enter into mutual recognition arrangements with the relevant bodies of other Parties operating those registers.

Temporary Licensing or Registration of Engineers

8. Further to paragraph 4, in taking steps to implement a temporary or project-specific licensing or registration regime for engineers, a Party shall consult with its relevant professional bodies with respect to any recommendations for:

(a) the development of procedures for the temporary licensing or registration of engineers of another Party to permit them to practise their engineering specialties in its territory;

(b) the development of model procedures for adoption by the competent authorities throughout its territory to facilitate the temporary licensing or registration of those engineers;

(c) the engineering specialties to which priority should be given in developing temporary licensing or registration procedures; and

(d) other matters relating to the temporary licensing or registration of engineers identified in the consultations.

Legal Services

9. The Parties recognise that transnational legal services that cover the laws of multiple jurisdictions play an essential role in facilitating trade and investment and in promoting economic growth and business confidence.

10. If a Party regulates or seeks to regulate foreign lawyers and transnational legal practice, the Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to consider, subject to its laws and regulations, whether or in what manner:

(a) foreign lawyers may practise foreign law on the basis of their right to practise that law in their home jurisdiction;

(b) foreign lawyers may prepare for and appear in commercial arbitration, conciliation and mediation proceedings;

(c) local ethical, conduct and disciplinary standards are applied to foreign lawyers in a manner that is no more burdensome for foreign lawyers than the requirements imposed on domestic (host country) lawyers;

(d) alternatives for minimum residency requirements are provided for foreign lawyers, such as requirements that foreign lawyers disclose to clients their status as a foreign lawyer, or maintain professional indemnity insurance or alternatively disclose to clients that they lack that insurance;

(e) the following modes of providing transnational legal services are accommodated:

(i) on a temporary fly-in, fly-out basis;

(ii) through the use of web-based or telecommunications technology;

(iii) by establishing a commercial presence; and

(iv) through a combination of fly-in, fly-out and one or both of the other modes listed in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii);

(f) foreign lawyers and domestic (host country) lawyers may work together in the delivery of fully integrated transnational legal services; and

(g) a foreign law firm may use the firm name of its choice.

Professional Services Working Group

11. The Parties hereby establish a Professional Services Working Group (Working Group), composed of representatives of each Party, to facilitate the activities listed in paragraphs 1 through 4.

12. The Working Group shall liaise, as appropriate, to support the Parties’ relevant professional and regulatory bodies in pursuing the activities listed in paragraphs 1 through 4. This support may include providing points of contact, facilitating meetings and providing information regarding regulation of professional services in the Parties’ territories.

13. The Working Group shall meet annually, or as agreed by the Parties, to discuss progress towards the objectives in paragraphs 1 through 4. For a meeting to be held, at least two Parties must participate. It is not necessary for representatives of all Parties to participate in order to hold a meeting of the Working Group.

14. The Working Group shall report to the Commission on its progress and on the future direction of its work, within two years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

15. Decisions of the Working Group shall have effect only in relation to those Parties that participated in the meeting at which the decision was taken, except if:

(a) otherwise agreed by all Parties; or

(b) a Party that did not participate in the meeting requests to be covered by the decision and all Parties originally covered by the decision agree.

Annex 10-B

Express Delivery Services

1. For the purposes of this Annex, express delivery services means the collection, transport and delivery of documents, printed matter, parcels, goods or other items, on an expedited basis, while tracking and maintaining control of these items throughout the supply of the service. Express delivery services do not include air transport services, services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority, or maritime transport services.[11]

2. For the purposes of this Annex, postal monopoly means a measure maintained by a Party making a postal operator within the Party’s territory the exclusive supplier of specified collection, transport and delivery services.

3. Each Party that maintains a postal monopoly shall define the scope of the monopoly on the basis of objective criteria, including quantitative criteria such as price or weight thresholds.[12]

4. The Parties confirm their desire to maintain at least the level of market openness for express delivery services that each provides on the date of its signature of this Agreement. If a Party considers that another Party is not maintaining that level of market openness, it may request consultations. The other Party shall afford adequate opportunity for consultations and, to the extent possible, provide information in response to inquiries regarding the level of market openness and any related matter.

5. No Party shall allow a supplier of services covered by a postal monopoly to cross-subsidise its own or any other competitive supplier’s express delivery services with revenues derived from monopoly postal services.[13]

6. Each Party shall ensure that any supplier of services covered by a postal monopoly does not abuse its monopoly position to act in the Party’s territory in a manner inconsistent with the Party’s commitments under Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 10.3 (National Treatment) or Article 10.5 (Market Access) with respect to the supply of express delivery services.[14]

7. No Party shall:

(a) require an express delivery service supplier of another Party, as a condition of authorisation or licensing, to supply a basic universal postal service; or

(b) assess fees or other charges exclusively on express delivery service suppliers for the purpose of funding the supply of another delivery service.[15]

8. Each Party shall ensure that any authority responsible for regulating express delivery services is not accountable to any supplier of express delivery services, and that the decisions and procedures that the authority adopts are impartial, non-discriminatory and transparent with respect to all express delivery service suppliers in its territory.

Annex 10-C

Non-Conforming Measures Ratchet Mechanism

Notwithstanding Article 10.7.1(c) (Non-Conforming Measures), for Viet Nam for three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it:

(a) Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access) and Article 10.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 10.7.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed at the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam, with Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access) or Article 10.6 (Local Presence);

(b) Viet Nam shall not withdraw a right or benefit from a service supplier of another Party, in reliance on which the service supplier has taken any concrete action,[16] through an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 10.7.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) that decreases the conformity of the measure as it existed immediately before the amendment; and

(c) Viet Nam shall provide to the other Parties the details of any amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 10.7.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) that would decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, at least 90 days before making the amendment.

[1] For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter, including Annexes 10-A (Professional Services), 10-B (Express Delivery Services), and 10-C (Non-Conforming Measures Ratchet Mechanism), is subject to investor-State dispute settlement pursuant to Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment).

[2] For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 10.3 (National Treatment) or Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between services or service suppliers on the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.

[3] Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

[4] With respect to Viet Nam, Annex 10-C applies.

[5] For greater certainty, a Party may request consultations with another Party regarding non-conforming measures applied by the central level of government, as referred to in subparagraph 1(a)(i).

[6] “Relevant international organisations” refers to international bodies whose membership is open to the relevant bodies of at least all Parties to the Agreement.

[7] For the purposes of this paragraph, authorisation fees do not include fees for the use of natural resources, payments for auction, tendering or other non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service provision.

[8] The implementation of the obligation to maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms may need to take into account the resource and budget constraints of small administrative agencies.

[9] For greater certainty, this Article is subject to Annex 9-E (Transfers).

[10] For greater certainty, this Article does not preclude the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of a Party’s laws relating to its social security, public retirement or compulsory savings programmes.

[11] For greater certainty, express delivery services does not include: (a) for Australia, services reserved for exclusive supply by Australia Post as set out in the Australian Postal Corporation Act 1989 and its subordinate legislation and regulations; (b) for Brunei Darussalam, reserved exclusive rights for collection and delivery of letters by the Postal Services Department as set out in the Post Office Act (Chapter 52 of the Laws of Brunei), the Guidelines to Application of License for the Provision of Local Express Letter Service (2000) and the Guidelines to Application of License for the Provision of International Express Letter Service (2000); (c) for Canada, services reserved for exclusive supply by Canada Post Corporation as set out in the Canada Post Corporation Act and its regulations; (d) for Japan, correspondence delivery services within the meaning of the Law Concerning Correspondence Delivery Provided by Private Operators (Law No. 99, 2002) other than special correspondence delivery services as set out in Article 2, paragraph 7 of the law; (e) for Malaysia, reserved exclusive rights for collection and delivery of letters by Pos Malaysia as provided for under the Postal Services Act 2012; (f) for Mexico, mail services reserved for exclusive supply by the Mexican Postal Service as set out in the Mexican Postal laws and regulations, as well as motor carrier freight transportation services, as set forth in Title III of the Roads, Bridges, and Federal Motor Carrier Transportation Law and its regulations; (g) for New Zealand, the fastpost service and equivalent priority domestic mail services; (h) for Singapore, postal services as set out in the Postal Services Act (Cap 237A) 2000 and certain express letter services which are administered under the Postal Services (Class License) Regulations 2005; (i) for the United States, delivery of letters over post routes subject to 18 U.S.C. 1693–1699 and 39 U.S.C. 601–606, but does include delivery of letters subject to the exceptions therein; and (j) for Viet Nam, reserved services as set out in Viet Nam Postal Law and relevant legal documents.

[12] For greater certainty, the Parties understand that the scope of Chile’s postal monopoly is defined on the basis of objective criteria by Decree 5037 (1960) and the ability of suppliers to supply delivery services in Chile is not limited by this Decree.

[13] In the case of Viet Nam, this obligation shall not apply until three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it. During this period, if a Party considers that Viet Nam is allowing such cross-subsidisation, it may request consultations. Viet Nam shall afford adequate opportunity for consultations and, to the extent possible, shall provide information in response to inquiries regarding the cross-subsidisation.

[14] For greater certainty, a supplier of services covered by a postal monopoly that exercises a right or privilege incidental to or associated with its monopoly position in a manner that is consistent with the Party’s commitments listed in this paragraph with respect to express delivery services is not acting in a manner inconsistent with this paragraph.

[15] This paragraph shall not be construed to prevent a Party from imposing non-discriminatory fees on delivery service suppliers on the basis of objective and reasonable criteria, or from assessing fees or other charges on the express delivery services of its own supplier of services covered by a postal monopoly.

[16] Concrete action includes the channeling of resources or capital in order to establish or expand a business and applying for permits and licenses.


*************** Chapter 11 ***************

--- Financial Services ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/b92dd3022b64)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Financial Services chapter opens markets for U.S. financial services providers and workers in the world’s fastest-growing region. Equally important, it makes sure that the United States and other TPP members have the ability to fully regulate financial markets so as to ensure financial stability that contributes to sustainable growth, providing TPP governments with broad latitude for prudential regulation, including emergency measures in the event of financial crisis, and full ability to perform robust oversight of financial service providers.

Overview

Scope

TPP’s Financial Services chapter includes commitments relating to (1) regulated financial institutions (e.g., in the case of the United States, that means financial services suppliers regulated and supervised by regulators such as the Federal Reserve or the Securities and Exchange Commission); (2) any investors or investments in financial institutions; and (3) cross-border trade in financial services. It does not apply to public retirement plans or social security systems.

Core obligations

The chapter includes several core obligations found in all U.S. FTAs (subject to country-specific exceptions that are negotiated and agreed):

National treatment for investors and investments in financial institutions in TPP countries — that is, the agreement provides that no country shall discriminate against foreign providers of services in favor of its own nationals;Most-favored nation treatment, which provides that no country shall discriminate in favor of one TPP country over another TPP country, or a non-TPP country with regard to the cross-border supply of specifically listed financial services (such as marine, aviation, transportation insurance and financial advisory services);Market access, which provides that no country may impose quantitative restrictions on the number of financial institutions, total value or number of financial services transactions or assets or restrictions on the type of legal entity through which a financial institution may supply a service in another TPP market.

Minimum Standard of Treatment

The chapter includes provision of the minimum standard of treatment (e.g., allowing for claims for denial of justice or failure to provide police protection) bounded by customary international law (i.e., those limited actions governments take out of sense of legal obligation), as well as claims for damages due to civil strife (i.e., losses suffered as a result of armed conflict or civil strife); and

Cross-Border Trade

Access to cross-border trade is critical to U.S. competitiveness, and ensures that TPP will promote employment and growth in the United States as well as access to financial products abroad. Reflecting these goals, the Financial Services chapter includes a general commitment that each Party permit the sale of financial services across borders from suppliers located in the United States or other TPP Party. At the same time, the chapter allows a TPP Party to require registration or authorization of cross-border financial services suppliers of another TPP Party in order to help assure appropriate regulation and oversight.

New Financial Services

The chapter includes rules that would allow a Party’s financial institution to supply a new financial service in the territory of another Party when that Party already permits the supply of that service by its local financial institutions. It also includes provisions that allow a Party to determine the institutional and juridical form through which the new financial service can be supplied and/or to require authorization for prudential reasons to supply the new service.

Treatment of Confidential Information

The United States is committed to the safeguard of financial information. Consistent with this principle, the Financial Services chapter includes rules that clarify that TPP Parties will not be required to furnish or allow access to information related to the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers, or any confidential information that would impede law enforcement, damage the public interest, or prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular firms.

Senior Management and Board of Directors

TPP Parties agree not to impose nationality requirements on senior management or other essential personnel, or impose nationality or residency requirements on more than a minority of the board of directors of a financial institution of another TPP Party.

Non-conforming measures (NCMs)

In two annexes to the chapter, Parties have negotiated country-specific exceptions to the core obligations:

Annex A allows countries to maintain a current measure inconsistent with specified obligations of the TPP, but not to make that measure more restrictive. Any future liberalization of measures listed in Annex A will be subject to the rules of the agreement.Annex B allows countries to maintain certain existing or future measures that are inconsistent with TPP in the specific sectors it lists in the Annex.

Exceptions

Two critically important exceptions preserve broad discretion for TPP financial regulators to take measures to promote financial stability and the integrity of their financial systems.

Prudential MeasuresThe prudential exception provision ensures that a Party may adopt or maintain measures for prudential reasons, including for the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders, persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial institution or cross-border service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. The prudential measures exception applies to the entire TPP Agreement except for the goods and goods-related chapters.Monetary exceptionThe monetary exception provides that certain chapters of the agreement (in particular those relating to services and investment) do not apply to non-discriminatory measures of general application in pursuit of monetary and related credit policies.

Expedited Availability of Insurance Services

The chapter includes rules that formally recognize the importance of regulatory procedures to expedite the offering of insurance services by licensed suppliers and procedures to achieve this outcome.

Specific Commitments

Beyond these general provisions, the Financial Services chapter includes a set of specific commitments:

Portfolio ManagementAllows a portfolio manager located outside its territory (other than a trust company) to provide advice to an asset manager located in its territory.Supply of Insurance by Postal EntitiesObligates Parties not to give preferential treatment to postal entities selling direct insurance, including by giving them preferential rights to distribution channels or subjecting them to less stringent enforcement.Electronic Payment Card ServicesRequires TPP Parties to allow the cross-border supply of electronic payment services, creating new opportunities for U.S. suppliers of electronic credit and debit payment services, a major new growth area in financial services.Transfer of InformationObligates Parties to permit cross-border transfer of information for data processing where such processing is required in a financial institution’s ordinary course of business.Investment Disputes in Financial Services The chapter establishes important safeguards in the event of investment disputes involving financial regulatory measures, including provisions regarding the financial expertise of potential arbitrators. Most significantly, the chapter establishes a special procedure whereby any dispute relating to a prudential measure can immediately be removed from an investor-State arbitration proceeding and placed under the review of the financial regulatory authorities of the concerned TPP Parties. Any differences between those authorities as to the application of the prudential exception can then be resolved through a separate, State-to-State arbitration between relevant TPP governments, rather than in an investor-State proceeding.

New Features

The Financial Services chapter contains several new features:

Specific commitments allowing for the cross-border delivery of electronic payment card services, a service in which U.S. firms are globally competitive, but which some countries are seeking to restrict.Stronger disciplines regarding postal entities selling insurance in order to ensure a level playing field for U.S. insurers competing with such entities in TPP markets.Multiple safeguards to help ensure that TPP Parties may apply the prudential measures exception provision or the other exceptions under the Financial Services chapter.

Impact

U.S. financial services and insurance firms help Americans to secure and grow wealth, finance opportunities, and prepare for retirement. These firms provide services critical to every sector of the economy, including small- and medium-sized businesses. Financial services exports contribute a $68 billion surplus to the U.S. balance of payments, reflecting the competitiveness of the American financial and insurance industries. TPP partner countries, with available data, accounted for about one quarter of total U.S. services trade, including purchasing $16 billion worth of U.S. financial services in 2013.

The Asia-Pacific is an important region for financial services exports. It is the center of global investment in infrastructure, requiring exceptionally large commitments of financial resources for governments and large businesses. High-standard rules for trade and investment in the financial services sector in the TPP will ensure that American businesses and workers can serve all these varied markets, promoting economic growth and job development in the United States and throughout the Asia-Pacific region.

At the same time, the United States and other TPP countries have faced serious financial crises in recent years. These crises have heightened the focus on ensuring governments’ right to regulate the financial services sector in order to protect consumers and ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. TPP’s Financial Services chapter fully protects and ensures the right to regulate of all TPP parties. Nothing in TPP’s Financial Services chapter will require changes to U.S. law, regulations, policy, or practice.

Article 11.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

cross-border financial service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that is engaged in the business of supplying a financial service within the territory of the Party and that seeks to supply or supplies a financial service through the cross-border supply of such a service;

cross-border trade in financial services or cross-border supply of financial services means the supply of a financial service:

(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of another Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party to a person of another Party; or

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of another Party,

but does not include the supply of a financial service in the territory of a Party by an investment in that territory;

financial institution means any financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorised to do business and regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the law of the Party in whose territory it is located;

financial institution of another Party means a financial institution, including a branch, located in the territory of a Party that is controlled by persons of another Party;

financial service means any service of a financial nature. Financial services include all insurance and insurance-related services, and all banking and other financial services (excluding insurance), as well as services incidental or auxiliary to a service of a financial nature. Financial services include the following activities:

Insurance and insurance-related services

(a) direct insurance (including co-insurance):

(i) life;

(ii) non-life;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; and

(d) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment and claim settlement services;

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

(e) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

(f) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring and financing of commercial transaction;

(g) financial leasing;

(h) all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts;

(i) guarantees and commitments;

(j) trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:

(i) money market instruments (including cheques, bills, certificates of deposits);

(ii) foreign exchange;

(iii) derivative products, including futures and options;

(iv) exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as swaps, forward rate agreements;

(v) transferable securities; and

(vi) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion;

(k) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of services related to such issues;

(l) money broking;

(m) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial, depository and trust services;

(n) settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;

(o) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software by suppliers of other financial services; and

(p) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities listed in subparagraphs (e) through (o), including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy;

financial service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that is engaged in the business of supplying a financial service within the territory of that Party;

investment means “investment” as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions), except that, with respect to “loans” and “debt instruments” referred to in that Article:

(a) a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution is an investment only if it is treated as regulatory capital by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is located; and

(b) a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a financial institution, other than a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution referred to in subparagraph (a), is not an investment;

for greater certainty, a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a cross-border financial service supplier, other than a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution, is an investment for the purposes of Chapter 9 (Investment), if such loan or debt instrument meets the criteria for investments set out in Article 9.1 (Definitions);

investor of a Party means a Party, or a person of a Party, that attempts to make[1], is making, or has made an investment in the territory of another Party;

new financial service means a financial service not supplied in the Party’s territory that is supplied within the territory of another Party, and includes any new form of delivery of a financial service or the sale of a financial product that is not sold in the Party’s territory;

person of a Party means “person of a Party” as defined in Article 1.3 (General Definitions) and, for greater certainty, does not include a branch of an enterprise of a non-Party;

public entity means a central bank or monetary authority of a Party, or any financial institution that is owned or controlled by a Party; and

self-regulatory organisation means any non-governmental body, including any securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or association, that exercises regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service suppliers or financial institutions by statute or delegation from central or regional government.

Article 11.2: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) financial institutions of another Party;

(b) investors of another Party, and investments of those investors, in financial institutions in the Party’s territory; and

(c) cross-border trade in financial services.

2. Chapter 9 (Investment) and Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services) shall apply to measures described in paragraph 1 only to the extent that those Chapters or Articles of those Chapters are incorporated into this Chapter.

(a) Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), Article 9.7 (Treatment in the Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife), Article 9.8 (Expropriation and Compensation), Article 9.9 (Transfers), Article 9.13 (Special Formalities and Information Requirements), Article 9.14 (Denial of Benefits), Article 9.15 (Investment and Environmental, Health and other Regulatory Objectives) and Article 10.10 (Denial of Benefits) are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter.

(b) Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter[2] solely for claims that a Party has breached Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment)[3], Article 9.7 (Treatment in the Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife), Article 9.8 (Expropriation and Compensation), Article 9.9 (Transfers), Article 9.13 (Special Formalities and Information Requirements) and Article 9.14 (Denial of Benefits) incorporated into this Chapter under subparagraph (a).[4]

(c) Article 10.12 (Payments and Transfers) is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter to the extent that cross-border trade in financial services is subject to obligations pursuant to Article 11.6 (Cross-Border Trade).

3. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or statutory system of social security; or

(b) activities or services conducted for the account or with the guarantee or using the financial resources of the Party, including its public entities,

except that this Chapter shall apply to the extent that a Party allows any of the activities or services referred to in subparagraph (a) or (b) to be conducted by its financial institutions in competition with a public entity or a financial institution.

4. This Chapter shall not apply to government procurement of financial services.

5. This Chapter shall not apply to subsidies or grants with respect to the cross-border supply of financial services, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance.

Article 11.3: National Treatment[5]

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own investors, in like circumstances, with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of financial institutions and investments in financial institutions in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to financial institutions of another Party, and to investments of investors of another Party in financial institutions, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own financial institutions, and to investments of its own investors in financial institutions, in like circumstances, with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of financial institutions and investments.

3. For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regional level of government to investors, financial institutions and investments of investors in financial institutions, of the Party of which it forms a part.

4. For the purposes of the national treatment obligations in Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade), a Party shall accord to cross-border financial service suppliers of another Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own financial service suppliers, in like circumstances, with respect to the supply of the relevant service.

Article 11.4: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to:

(a) investors of another Party, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to investors of any other Party or of a non-Party, in like circumstances;

(b) financial institutions of another Party, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to financial institutions of any other Party or of a non-Party, in like circumstances;

(c) investments of investors of another Party in financial institutions, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to investments of investors of any other Party or of a non-Party in financial institutions, in like circumstances; and

(d) cross-border financial service suppliers of another Party, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to cross-border financial service suppliers of any other Party or of a non-Party, in like circumstances.

2. For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in paragraph 1 does not encompass international dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms such as those included in Article 11.2.2(b) (Scope).

Article 11.5: Market Access for Financial Institutions

No Party shall adopt or maintain with respect to financial institutions of another Party or investors of another Party seeking to establish those institutions, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, measures that:

(a) impose limitations on:

(i) the number of financial institutions whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii) the total value of financial service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of financial service operations or the total quantity of financial services output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;[6] or

(iv) the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular financial service sector or that a financial institution may employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific financial service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or

(b) restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a financial institution may supply a service.

Article 11.6: Cross-Border Trade

1. Each Party shall permit, under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, cross-border financial service suppliers of another Party to supply the financial services specified in Annex 11-A (Cross-Border Trade).

2. Each Party shall permit persons located in its territory, and its nationals wherever located, to purchase financial services from cross-border financial service suppliers of another Party located in the territory of a Party other than the permitting Party. This obligation does not require a Party to permit those suppliers to do business or solicit in its territory. A Party may define “doing business” and “solicitation” for the purposes of this obligation provided that those definitions are not inconsistent with paragraph 1.

3. Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, a Party may require the registration or authorisation of cross-border financial service suppliers of another Party and of financial instruments.

Article 11.7: New Financial Services[7]

Each Party shall permit a financial institution of another Party to supply a new financial service that the Party would permit its own financial institutions, in like circumstances, to supply without adopting a law or modifying an existing law.[8] Notwithstanding Article 11.5(b) (Market Access for Financial Institutions), a Party may determine the institutional and juridical form through which the new financial service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the service. If a Party requires a financial institution to obtain authorisation to supply a new financial service, the Party shall decide within a reasonable period of time whether to issue the authorisation and may refuse the authorisation only for prudential reasons.

Article 11.8: Treatment of Certain Information

Nothing in this Chapter shall require a Party to furnish or allow access to:

(a) information related to the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial institutions or cross-border financial service suppliers; or

(b) any confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises.

Article 11.9: Senior Management and Boards of Directors

1. No Party shall require financial institutions of another Party to engage natural persons of any particular nationality as senior managerial or other essential personnel.

2. No Party shall require that more than a minority of the board of directors of a financial institution of another Party be composed of nationals of the Party, persons residing in the territory of the Party, or a combination thereof.

Article 11.10: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Article 11.3 (National Treatment) through Article 11.6 (Cross-Border Trade) and Article 11.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at:

(i) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III;

(ii) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III; or

(iii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure as it existed:[9]

(i) immediately before the amendment, with Article 11.3 (National Treatment), Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions) or Article 11.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors); or

(ii) on the date of entry into force of the Agreement for the Party applying the non-conforming measure, with Article 11.6 (Cross-Border Trade).

2. Article 11.3 (National Treatment), Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions), Article 11.6 (Cross-Border Trade) and Article 11.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors or activities, as set out by that Party in Section B of its Schedule to Annex III.

3. A non-conforming measure, set out in a Party’s Schedule to Annex I or II as not subject to Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 9.11 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors), Article 10.3 (National Treatment) or Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), shall be treated as a non-conforming measure not subject to Article 11.3 (National Treatment), Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) or Article 11.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors), as the case may be, to the extent that the measure, sector, subsector or activity set out in the entry is covered by this Chapter.

4. (a) Article 11.3 (National Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that falls within an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations which are imposed by:

(i) Article 18.8 (National Treatment); or

(ii) Article 3 of the TRIPS Agreement, if the exception or derogation relates to matters not addressed by Chapter 18 (Intellectual Property).

(b) Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that falls within Article 5 of the TRIPS Agreement, or an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations which are imposed by:

(i) Article 18.8 (National Treatment); or

(ii) Article 4 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 11.11: Exceptions

1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter and Agreement except for Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures), Chapter 4 (Textiles and Apparel), Chapter 5 (Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation), Chapter 6 (Trade Remedies), Chapter 7 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 8 (Technical Barriers to Trade), a Party shall not be prevented from adopting or maintaining measures for prudential reasons,[10], [11] including for the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders, or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial institution or cross-border financial service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. If these measures do not conform with the provisions of this Agreement to which this exception applies, they shall not be used as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under those provisions.

2. Nothing in this Chapter, Chapter 9 (Investment), Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), Chapter 13 (Telecommunications) including specifically Article 13.24 (Relation to Other Chapters), or Chapter 14 (Electronic Commerce), shall apply to non-discriminatory measures of general application taken by any public entity in pursuit of monetary and related credit policies or exchange rate policies. This paragraph shall not affect a Party’s obligations under Article 9.10 (Performance Requirements) with respect to measures covered by Chapter 9 (Investment), under Article 9.9 (Transfers) or Article 10.12 (Payments and Transfers).

3. Notwithstanding Article 9.9 (Transfers) and Article 10.12 (Payments and Transfers), as incorporated into this Chapter, a Party may prevent or limit transfers by a financial institution or cross-border financial service supplier to, or for the benefit of, an affiliate of or person related to such institution or supplier, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of measures relating to maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service suppliers. This paragraph does not prejudice any other provision of this Agreement that permits a Party to restrict transfers.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or enforcing measures necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with this Chapter, including those relating to the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the effects of a default on financial services contracts, subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Parties or between Parties and non-Parties where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on investment in financial institutions or cross-border trade in financial services as covered by this Chapter.

Article 11.12: Recognition

1. A Party may recognise prudential measures of another Party or a non-Party in the application of measures covered by this Chapter.[12] That recognition may be:

(a) accorded autonomously;

(b) achieved through harmonisation or other means; or

(c) based upon an agreement or arrangement with another Party or a non-Party.

2. A Party that accords recognition of prudential measures under paragraph 1 shall provide adequate opportunity to another Party to demonstrate that circumstances exist in which there are or would be equivalent regulation, oversight, implementation of regulation and, if appropriate, procedures concerning the sharing of information between the relevant Parties.

3. If a Party accords recognition of prudential measures under paragraph 1(c) and the circumstances set out in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide adequate opportunity to another Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement.

Article 11.13: Transparency and Administration of Certain Measures

1. The Parties recognise that transparent regulations and policies governing the activities of financial institutions and cross-border financial service suppliers are important in facilitating their ability to gain access to and operate in each other’s markets. Each Party commits to promote regulatory transparency in financial services.

2. Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application to which this Chapter applies are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

3. Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Article 26.2 (Publication), shall not apply to regulations of general application relating to the subject matter of this Chapter. Each Party shall, to the extent practicable:

(a) publish in advance any such regulation that it proposes to adopt and the purpose of the regulation; and

(b) provide interested persons and other Parties with a reasonable opportunity to comment on that proposed regulation.

4. At the time that it adopts a final regulation, a Party should, to the extent practicable, address in writing the substantive comments received from interested persons with respect to the proposed regulation.[13]

5. To the extent practicable, each Party should allow a reasonable period of time between publication of a final regulation of general application and the date when it enters into effect.

6. Each Party shall ensure that the rules of general application adopted or maintained by a self-regulatory organisation of the Party are promptly published or otherwise made available in a manner that enables interested persons to become acquainted with them.

7. Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for responding to inquiries from interested persons regarding measures of general application covered by this Chapter.

8. Each Party’s regulatory authorities shall make publicly available the requirements, including any documentation required, for completing an application relating to the supply of financial services.

9. On request of an applicant, a Party’s regulatory authority shall inform the applicant of the status of its application. If the authority requires additional information from the applicant, it shall notify the applicant without undue delay.

10. A Party’s regulatory authority shall make an administrative decision on a complete application of an investor in a financial institution, a financial institution or a cross-border financial service supplier of another Party relating to the supply of a financial service, within 120 days and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision. An application shall not be considered complete until all relevant hearings have been held and all necessary information has been received. If it is not practicable for a decision to be made within 120 days, the regulatory authority shall notify the applicant without undue delay and shall endeavour to make the decision within a reasonable period of time thereafter.

11. On request of an unsuccessful applicant, a regulatory authority that has denied an application shall, to the extent practicable, inform the applicant of the reasons for denial of the application.

Article 11.14: Self-Regulatory Organisations

If a Party requires a financial institution or a cross-border financial service supplier of another Party to be a member of, participate in, or have access to, a self-regulatory organisation in order to provide a financial service in or into its territory, it shall ensure that the self-regulatory organisation observes the obligations contained in Article 11.3 (National Treatment) and Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment).

Article 11.15: Payment and Clearing Systems

Under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party shall grant financial institutions of another Party established in its territory access to payment and clearing systems operated by public entities, and to official funding and refinancing facilities available in the normal course of ordinary business. This Article is not intended to confer access to the Party’s lender of last resort facilities.

Article 11.16: Expedited Availability of Insurance Services

The Parties recognise the importance of maintaining and developing regulatory procedures to expedite the offering of insurance services by licensed suppliers. These procedures may include: allowing introduction of products unless those products are disapproved within a reasonable period of time; not requiring product approval or authorisation of insurance lines for insurance other than insurance sold to individuals or compulsory insurance; or not imposing limitations on the number or frequency of product introductions. If a Party maintains regulatory product approval procedures, that Party shall endeavour to maintain or improve those procedures.

Article 11.17: Performance of Back-Office Functions

1. The Parties recognise that the performance of the back-office functions of a financial institution in its territory by the head office or an affiliate of the financial institution, or by an unrelated service supplier, either inside or outside its territory, is important to the effective management and efficient operation of that financial institution. While a Party may require financial institutions to ensure compliance with any domestic requirements applicable to those functions, they recognise the importance of avoiding the imposition of arbitrary requirements on the performance of those functions.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 prevents a Party from requiring a financial institution in its territory to retain certain functions.

Article 11.18: Specific Commitments

Annex 11-B (Specific Commitments) sets out certain specific commitments by each Party.

Article 11.19: Committee on Financial Services

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Financial Services (Committee). The principal representative of each Party shall be an official of the Party’s authority responsible for financial services set out in Annex 11-D (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services).

2. The Committee shall:

(a) supervise the implementation of this Chapter and its further elaboration;

(b) consider issues regarding financial services that are referred to it by a Party; and

(c) participate in the dispute settlement procedures in accordance with Article 11.22 (Investment Disputes in Financial Services).

3. The Committee shall meet annually, or as it decides otherwise, to assess the functioning of this Agreement as it applies to financial services. The Committee shall inform the Commission of the results of any meeting.

Article 11.20: Consultations

1. A Party may request, in writing, consultations with another Party regarding any matter arising under this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall give sympathetic consideration to the request to hold consultations. The consulting Parties shall report the results of their consultations to the Committee.

2. With regard to matters relating to existing non-conforming measures maintained by a Party at a regional level of government as referred to in Article 11.10.1(a)(ii) (Non-Conforming Measures):

(a) A Party may request information on any non-conforming measure at the regional level of government of another Party. Each Party shall establish a contact point to respond to those requests and to facilitate the exchange of information regarding the operation of measures covered by those requests.

(b) If a Party considers that a non-conforming measure applied by a regional level of government of another Party creates a material impediment to trade or investment by a financial institution, an investor, investments in a financial institution or a cross-border financial service supplier, the Party may request consultations with regard to that measure. These Parties shall enter into consultations with a view to exchanging information on the operation of the measure and to considering whether further steps are necessary and appropriate.

3. Consultations under this Article shall include officials of the authorities specified in Annex 11-D (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services).

4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a Party to derogate from its law regarding sharing of information between financial regulators or the requirements of an agreement or arrangement between financial authorities of the Parties, or to require a regulatory authority to take any action that would interfere with specific regulatory, supervisory, administrative or enforcement matters.

Article 11.21: Dispute Settlement

1. Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall apply as modified by this Article to the settlement of disputes arising under this Chapter.

2. If a Party claims that a dispute arises under this Chapter, Article 28.9 (Composition of Panels) shall apply, except that:

(a) if the disputing Parties agree, each panellist shall meet the qualifications in paragraph 3; and

(b) in any other case:

(i) each disputing Party shall select panellists that meet the qualifications set out in either paragraph 3 or Article 28.10.1 (Qualifications of Panellists); and

(ii) if the responding Party invokes Article 11.11 (Exceptions), the chair of the panel shall meet the qualifications set out in paragraph 3, unless the disputing Parties otherwise agree.

3. In addition to the requirements set out in Article 28.10.1(b) to (d) (Qualifications of Panellists), panellists in disputes arising under this Chapter shall have expertise or experience in financial services law or practice, which may include the regulation of financial institutions.

4. A Party may request the establishment of a panel pursuant to Article 11.22.2(c) (Investment Disputes in Financial Services) to consider whether and to what extent Article 11.11 (Exceptions) is a valid defence to a claim without having to request consultations under Article 28.5 (Consultations). The panel shall endeavour to present its initial report pursuant to Article 28.17 (Initial Report) within 150 days after the last panellist is appointed.

5. If a Party seeks to suspend benefits in the financial services sector, a panel that reconvenes to make a determination on the proposed suspension of benefits, in accordance with Article 28.20.6 (Non-Implementation — Compensation and Suspension of Benefits), shall seek the views of financial services experts, as necessary.

Article 11.22: Investment Disputes in Financial Services

1. If an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) challenging a measure relating to regulation or supervision of financial institutions, markets or instruments, the expertise or experience of any particular candidate with respect to financial services law or practice shall be taken into account in the appointment of arbitrators to the tribunal.

2. If an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment), and the respondent invokes Article 11.11 (Exceptions) as a defence, the following provisions of this Article shall apply.

(a) The respondent shall, no later than the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial, or in the case of an amendment to the notice of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its response to the amendment, submit in writing to the authorities responsible for financial services of the Party of the claimant, as set out in Annex 11-D (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services), a request for a joint determination by the authorities of the respondent and the Party of the claimant on the issue of whether and to what extent Article 11.11 (Exceptions) is a valid defence to the claim. The respondent shall promptly provide the tribunal, if constituted, and the non-disputing Parties a copy of the request. The arbitration may proceed with respect to the claim only as provided in paragraph 4.[14]

(b) The authorities of the respondent and the Party of the claimant shall attempt in good faith to make a determination as described in subparagraph (a). Any such determination shall be transmitted promptly to the disputing parties, the Committee and, if constituted, to the tribunal. The determination shall be binding on the tribunal and any decision or award issued by the tribunal must be consistent with that determination.

(c) If the authorities referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) have not made a determination within 120 days of the date of receipt of the respondent’s written request for a determination under subparagraph (a), the respondent or the Party of the claimant may request the establishment of a panel under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) to consider whether and to what extent Article 11.11 (Exceptions) is a valid defence to the claim. The panel established under Article 28.7 (Establishment of a Panel) shall be constituted in accordance with Article 11.21 (Dispute Settlement). Further to Article 28.18 (Final Report), the panel shall transmit its final report to the disputing Parties and to the tribunal.

3. The final report of a panel referred to in paragraph 2(c) shall be binding on the tribunal, and any decision or award issued by the tribunal must be consistent with the final report.

4. If no request for the establishment of a panel pursuant to paragraph 2(c) has been made within 10 days of the expiration of the 120 day period referred to in paragraph 2(c), the tribunal established under Article 9.19 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) may proceed with respect to the claim.

(a) The tribunal shall draw no inference regarding the application of Article 11.11 (Exceptions) from the fact that the authorities have not made a determination as described in paragraphs 2(a), (b) and (c).

(b) The Party of the claimant may make oral and written submissions to the tribunal regarding the issue of whether and to what extent Article 11.11 (Exceptions) is a valid defence to the claim. Unless it makes such a submission, the Party of the claimant shall be presumed, for the purposes of the arbitration, to take a position on Article 11.11 that is not inconsistent with that of the respondent.

5. For the purposes of this Article, the definitions of the following terms set out in Article 9.1 (Definitions) are incorporated, mutatis mutandis: “claimant”, “disputing parties”, “disputing party”, “non-disputing Party” and “respondent”.

Annex 11-A

Cross-Border Trade

Australia

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, risk assessment, actuarial and claim settlement services; and

(d) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), of insurance of risks related to services listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(b) advisory and other auxiliary services, excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Brunei Darussalam

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession; and

(c) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, risk assessment, actuarial and claim settlement services.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply only with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information; and

(b) provision and transfer of financial data processing and related software relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Canada[15]

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime transport and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability deriving therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) services auxiliary to insurance, as described in subparagraph (d) of the definition of “financial service” in Article KK.11.1 (Definitions); and

(d) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), of insurance of risks related to services listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Cross-Border Trade), with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(b) advisory and other auxiliary financial services, and credit reference and analysis, excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Chile

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) international maritime shipping and international commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability deriving there from; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) brokerage of insurance of risks relating to subparagraphs (a)(i) and (a)(ii); and

(c) reinsurance and retrocession; reinsurance brokerage; and consultancy, actuarial and risk assessment services.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions);

(b) financial data processing, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), subject to prior authorisation from the relevant regulator, as required;[16] and

(c) advisory and other auxiliary financial services, excluding intermediation and credit reference and analysis, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

3. It is understood that a Party’s commitments on cross-border investment advisory services shall not, in and of themselves, be construed to require the Party to permit the public offering of securities (as defined under its relevant law) in the territory of the Party by cross-border suppliers of the other Party who supply or seek to supply such investment advisory services. A Party may subject the cross-border suppliers of investment advisory services to regulatory and registration requirements.

Japan

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance, retrocession, and services auxiliary to insurance as referred to in subparagraph (d) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(c) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), of insurance of risks related to services listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.[17]

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) securities-related transactions with financial institutions and other entities in Japan as prescribed by the relevant laws and regulations of Japan;

(b) sales of a beneficiary certificate of an investment trust and an investment security, through securities firms in Japan;[18]

(c) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(d) advisory and other auxiliary services, excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Malaysia

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit; and

(b) reinsurance and retrocession; services auxiliary to insurance comprising consultancy services, actuarial, risk assessment, risk management and maritime loss adjusting; and brokerage services for risks relating to subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to the provision and transfer of financial information and financial data processing and related software, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

3. The commitment made by Malaysia under paragraph 2 does not extend to the supply of electronic payment services for payment card transactions[19].

Mexico

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services’ in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) consultancy, actuarial services and risk assessment in connection with subparagraphs (a) and (b); and

(d) brokerage of insurance of risks relating to subparagraphs (a) and (b).

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply only with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), subject to prior authorisation from the relevant regulator, as required;[20] and

(b) advisory and other auxiliary financial services,[21] excluding intermediation, and credit reference and analysis, relating to banking and other financial services as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

New Zealand

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession, as referred to in subparagraph (b) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions);

(c) services auxiliary to insurance, as referred to in subparagraph (d) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(d) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), of insurance risks relating to services listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information and financial data processing and related software, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(b) advisory and other auxiliary services, excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Peru[22]

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks related to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising there from; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment and claim settlement services; and

(d) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), of insurance of risks relating to services listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) in this paragraph.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply only with respect to the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1[23] (Definitions), subject to prior authorisation from the relevant regulator, as required, and advisory and other auxiliary financial services[24], excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).[25]

Singapore

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of “MAT” risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising there from; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) services auxiliary to insurance comprising actuarial, loss adjustors, average adjustors and consultancy services;

(d) reinsurance intermediation by brokerages; and

(e) MAT intermediation by brokerages.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, as described in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(b) financial data processing and related software, as described in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), subject to prior authorisation from the relevant regulator, as required.[26]

United States

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit; and

(b) reinsurance and retrocession; services auxiliary to insurance, as referred to in subparagraph (d) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (c) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to insurance services.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

3. Article 11.6.1 shall apply only with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions); and

(b) advisory and other auxiliary services, excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Viet Nam

Insurance and insurance-related services

1. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) insurance of risks relating to:

(i) international maritime shipping and international commercial aviation with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, and any liability arising therefrom; and

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession; and

(c) brokerage services, and services auxiliary to insurance, as referred to in subparagraph (d) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

2. Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of “cross-border supply of financial services” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, as referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), subject to prior authorisation from the relevant regulator, as required;[27] and

(b) advisory and other auxiliary services, excluding intermediation, relating to banking and other financial services, as referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), to the extent that such services are permitted in the future by Viet Nam.

Annex 11-B

Specific Commitments

SECTION A: PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

1. A Party shall allow a financial institution organised in the territory of another Party to provide the following services to a collective investment scheme located in its territory[28]:

(a) investment advice; and

(b) portfolio management services, excluding:

(i) trustee services; and

(ii) custodial services and execution services that are not related to managing a collective investment scheme.

2. Paragraph 1 is subject to Article 11.6.3 (Cross-Border Trade).

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, collective investment scheme means:

(a) For Australia, a “managed investment scheme” as defined under section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth), other than a managed investment scheme operated in contravention of subsection 601ED (5) of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth), or an entity that:

(i) carries on a business of investment in securities, interests in land, or other investments; and

(ii) in the course of carrying on that business, invests funds subscribed, whether directly or indirectly, after an offer or invitation to the public (within the meaning of section 82 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)) made on terms that the funds subscribed would be invested.

(b) For Brunei Darussalam:

(i) A “collective investment scheme”, defined under Section 203, of the Securities Market Order, 2013 as any investment arrangements with respect to assets of any description, including money, the purpose or effect of which is to enable persons taking part in the arrangements (whether by becoming owners of the property or any part of it or otherwise) to participate in or receive profits or income arising from the acquisition, holding, management or disposal of the property or sums paid out of such profits or income.

(ii) The arrangements must be such that:

(A) the persons who are to participate (participants) do not have day-to-day control over the management of the property, whether or not they have the right to be consulted or to give directions;

(B) the arrangements must also have either or both of the following characteristics:

(1) the contributions of the participants and the profits or income out of which payments are to be made to them are pooled; and

(2) the property is managed as a whole, by or on behalf of the operator of the collective investment scheme; and

(C) the arrangements must satisfy the condition set out in subparagraph (iii).

(iii) The condition referred to in subparagraph (ii)(B) is that the property belongs beneficially to, and is managed by or on behalf of, a company, the trustee of a trust or some other entity or arrangement having as its purpose the investment of its funds with the aim of spreading the investment risk and giving its members the benefit of the results of the management of those funds for or on behalf of that company, trust, entity or arrangement.

(c) For Canada, an “investment fund” as defined under the relevant Securities Act.[29]

(d) For Chile, a “General Management Fund” (Administradora General de Fondos) as defined in Law 20.712 which is subject to supervision by the Superintendence of Securities and Insurance (Superintendencia de Valores y Seguros), excluding the provision of custodial services that are related to managing a collective investment scheme.

(e) For Japan, a “financial instruments business operator” engaged in investment management business under the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law (Law No. 25 of 1948).

(f) For Malaysia, any arrangement where:

(i) the investment is made for the purpose, or having the effect, of providing facilities for persons to participate in or receive profits or income arising from the acquisition, holding, management or disposal of securities, futures contracts or any other property (referred to as “scheme’s assets”) or sums paid out of such profits or income;

(ii) the persons who participate in the arrangements do not have day-to-day control over the management of the scheme’s assets; and

(iii) the scheme’s assets are managed by an entity that is responsible for the management of the scheme’s assets and is approved, authorised or licensed by a relevant regulator to conduct fund management activities,

and includes, among others, unit trust funds, real estate investment trusts, exchange-traded funds, restricted investment schemes and closed-end funds.

(g) For Mexico, the “Managing Companies of Investment Funds” established under the Investment Funds Law (Ley de Fondos de Inversión). A financial institution organised in the territory of another Party will only be authorised to provide portfolio management services to a collective investment scheme located in Mexico if it provides the same services in the territory of the Party where it is established.

(h) For New Zealand, a “registered scheme” as defined under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013.[30]

(i) For Peru:

(i) mutual funds for investments and securities, pursuant to Single Ordered Text approved by Supreme Decree Nº 093–2002-EF (Texto Único Ordenado de la Ley de Mercado de Valores aprobado mediante Decreto Supremo Nº 093–2002-EF); or

(ii) investment funds, pursuant to Legislative Decree Nº 862 (Decreto Legislativo Nº 862, Ley de Fondos de Inversión y sus Sociedades Administradoras).

(j) For Singapore, a “collective investment scheme” as defined under the Securities and Futures Act (Cap. 289), and includes the manager of the scheme, provided that the financial institution in paragraph 1 is authorised or regulated as a fund manager in the territory of the Party it is organised in and is not a trust company.

(k) For the United States, an investment company registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Investment Company Act of 1940.[31]

(l) For Viet Nam, a fund management company established and operated under the Securities Law of Viet Nam, and subject to regulation and supervision by the State Securities Commission of Viet Nam, in case the services in paragraph 1 are provided to manage an investment fund which invests in the assets located outside Viet Nam.

SECTION B: TRANSFER OF INFORMATION

Each Party shall allow a financial institution of another Party to transfer information in electronic or other form, into and out of its territory, for data processing if such processing is required in the institution’s ordinary course of business. Nothing in this Section restricts the right of a Party to adopt or maintain measures to:

(a) protect personal data, personal privacy and the confidentiality of individual records and accounts; or

(b) require a financial institution to obtain prior authorisation from the relevant regulator to designate a particular enterprise as a recipient of such information, based on prudential considerations,[32]

provided that this right is not used as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under this Section.

SECTION C: SUPPLY OF INSURANCE BY POSTAL INSURANCE ENTITIES

1. This Section sets out additional disciplines that apply if a Party allows its postal insurance entity to underwrite and supply direct insurance services to the general public. The services covered by this paragraph do not include the supply of insurance related to the collection, transport and delivery of letters or packages by a Party’s postal insurance entity.

2. No Party shall adopt or maintain a measure that creates conditions of competition that are more favourable to a postal insurance entity with respect to the supply of insurance services described in paragraph 1 as compared to a private supplier of like insurance services in its market, including by:

(a) imposing more onerous conditions on a private supplier’s licence to supply insurance services than the conditions the Party imposes on a postal insurance entity to supply like services; or

(b) making a distribution channel for the sale of insurance services available to a postal insurance entity under terms and conditions more favourable than those it applies to private suppliers of like services.

3. With respect to the supply of insurance services described in paragraph 1 by a postal insurance entity, a Party shall apply the same regulations and enforcement activities that it applies to the supply of like insurance services by private suppliers.

4. In implementing its obligations under paragraph 3, a Party shall require a postal insurance entity that supplies insurance services described in paragraph 1 to publish an annual financial statement with respect to the supply of those services. The statement shall provide the level of detail and meet the auditing standards required under the generally accepted accounting and auditing principles, or equivalent rules, applied in the Party’s territory with respect to publicly traded private enterprises that supply like services.

5. If a panel under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) finds that a Party is maintaining a measure that is inconsistent with any of the commitments in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, the Party shall notify the complaining Party and provide an opportunity for consultations prior to allowing the postal insurance entity to:

(a) issue a new insurance product, or modify an existing product in a manner equivalent to the creation of a new product, in competition with like insurance products supplied by a private supplier in the Party’s market; or

(b) increase any limitation on the value of insurance, either in total or with regard to any type of insurance product, that the entity may sell to a single policyholder.

6. This Section shall not apply to a postal insurance entity in the territory of a Party:

(a) that the Party neither owns nor controls, directly or indirectly, as long as the Party does not maintain any advantages that modify the conditions of competition in favour of the postal insurance entity in the supply of insurance services as compared to a private supplier of like insurance services in its market; or

(b) if sales of direct life and non-life insurance underwritten by the postal insurance entity each account for no more than 10 per cent, respectively, of total annual premium income from direct life and non-life insurance in the Party’s market as of January 1, 2013.

7. If a postal insurance entity in the territory of a Party exceeds the percentage threshold referred to in paragraph 6(b) after the date of signature of this Agreement by the Party, the Party shall ensure that the postal insurance entity is:

(a) regulated and subject to enforcement by the same authorities that regulate and conduct enforcement activities with respect to the supply of insurance services by private suppliers; and

(b) subject to the financial reporting requirements that apply to financial institutions supplying insurance services.

8. For the purposes of this Section, postal insurance entity means an entity that underwrites and sells insurance to the general public and that is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by a postal entity of the Party.

SECTION D: ELECTRONIC PAYMENT CARD SERVICES

1. A Party shall allow the supply of electronic payment services for payment card transactions[33] into its territory from the territory of another Party by a person of that other Party. A Party may condition the cross-border supply of such electronic payment services on one or more of these requirements that a services supplier of another Party:

(a) register with or be authorised[34] by relevant authorities;

(b) be a supplier who supplies such services in the territory of the other Party; or

(c) designate an agent office or maintain a representative or sales office in the Party’s territory,

provided that such requirements are not used as a means to avoid a Party’s obligation under this Section.

2. For the purposes of this Section, electronic payment services for payment card transactions does not include the transfer of funds to and from transactors’ accounts. Furthermore, electronic payment services for payment card transactions include only those payment network services that use proprietary networks to process payment transactions. These services are provided on a business to business basis.

3. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures for public policy purposes, provided that these measures are not used as a means to avoid the Party’s obligation under this Section. For greater certainty, such measures may include:

(a) measures to protect personal data, personal privacy and the confidentiality of individual records, transactions and accounts, such as restricting the collection by, or transfer to, the cross-border services supplier of another Party, of information concerning cardholder names;

(b) the regulation of fees, such as interchange or switching fees; and

(c) the imposition of fees as may be determined by a Party’s authority, such as those to cover the costs associated with supervision or regulation or to facilitate the development of the Party’s payment system infrastructure.

4. For the purposes of this Section, payment card means:

(a) For Australia, a credit card, charge card, debit card, cheque card, automated teller machine (ATM) card, prepaid card, and other physical or electronic products or services for performing a similar function as such cards, and the unique account number associated with that card, product or service.

(b) For Brunei Darussalam, in accordance with its laws and regulations, a payment instrument, whether in physical or electronic format, that enables a person to obtain money, goods or services, or to otherwise make payment, including credit card, charge card, debit card, cheque, automated teller machine (ATM) card, prepaid card or other instruments widely used for performing a similar function.

(c) For Canada, a “payment card” as defined under the Payment Card Networks Act as of January 1, 2015. For greater certainty, both the physical and electronic forms of credit and debit cards are included in the definition. For greater certainty, credit cards include pre-paid cards.

(d) For Chile, a credit card, a debit card and a prepaid card in physical form or electronic format, as defined under Chilean law.

(i) In respect of such payment cards, in lieu of the scope of the cross-border electronic payment services referred to in this commitment, only the following cross-border financial services may be supplied:

(A) receiving and sending messages among acquirers and issuers or their agents and representatives through electronic or informatic channels for: authorisation requests, authorisation responses (approvals or declines), stand-in authorisations, adjustments, refunds, returns, retrievals, charge backs and related administrative messages;

(B) calculation of fees and balances derived from transactions of acquirers and issuers by means of automated or computerised systems, and receiving and sending messages related to this process to acquirers and issuers, and their agents and representatives, provided that those calculations are subject to approval, recognition or confirmation by the acquiring and issuing parties involved;

(C) the provision of periodic reconciliation, summaries and instructions regarding the net financial position of acquirers and issuers, and their agents and representatives for approved transactions; and

(D) value-added services related to the main processing activities in subparagraphs (d)(i)(A), (d)(i)(B) and (d)(i)(C), such as fraud prevention and mitigation activities, and administration of loyalty programmes.

Such cross-border financial services may only be supplied by a service supplier of another Party into the territory of Chile pursuant to this commitment, provided that such services are supplied to entities that are regulated by Chile in connection with their participation in card payment networks and that are contractually responsible for such services.

(ii) Nothing in this commitment restricts the right of Chile to adopt or maintain measures, in addition to all other measures set forth in Section D, that condition the cross-border supply of such electronic payment services into Chile by a service supplier of another Party on a contractual relationship between that supplier and an affiliate of the supplier established, authorised and regulated as a payments network participant under Chilean law in the territory of Chile, provided that such right is not used as a means of avoiding Chile’s commitments or obligations under Section D.

(e) For Japan:

(i) a credit card and a prepaid card in physical or electronic form as defined under the laws and regulations of Japan; and

(ii) a debit card in physical or electronic form, provided that such a card is allowed within the framework of the laws and regulations of Japan.

(f) For Malaysia, a credit card, a debit card and a prepaid card as defined under Malaysian law.

(g) For Mexico, a credit card and a debit card in physical form or electronic format, as defined under Mexican law.

(i) In respect of such payment cards, in lieu of the scope of the cross-border electronic payment services set forth in paragraph 1, only the following cross-border services may be supplied:

(A) receiving and sending messages for: authorisation requests, authorisation responses (approvals or declines), stand-in authorisations, adjustments, refunds, returns, retrievals, charge backs and related administrative messages;

(B) calculation of fees and balances derived from transactions of acquirers and issuers, and receiving and sending messages related to this process to acquirers and issuers, and their agents and representatives;

(C) the provision of periodic reconciliation, summaries and instructions regarding the net financial position of acquirers and issuers, and their agents and representatives for approved transactions; and

(D) value-added services related to the main processing activities in subparagraphs (g)(i)(A), (g)(i)(B) and (g)(i)(C), such as fraud prevention and mitigation activities, and administration of loyalty programmes.

(ii) Such cross-border services may only be supplied by a service provider of another Party into the territory of Mexico pursuant to this commitment, provided that the services are supplied to entities that are regulated by Mexico in connection with their participation in card payment networks and that are responsible for such services.

(iii) Nothing in this commitment restricts the right of Mexico to adopt or maintain measures, in addition to all other measures set forth in Section D, that condition the cross-border supply of such electronic payment services into Mexico by a service supplier of another Party on a contractual relationship between that supplier and an affiliate of the supplier established and authorised as a payments network participant under Mexican law in the territory of Mexico, provided that such right is not used as a means of avoiding Mexico’s commitments or obligations under Section D.

(h) For New Zealand, a credit or debit card in physical or electronic form.

(i) For Peru:

(i) credit and debit cards as defined under Peruvian laws and regulations; and

(ii) prepaid cards, as defined under Peruvian laws and regulations, that are issued by financial institutions.

(j) For Singapore:

(i) a credit card as defined in the Banking Act (Cap. 19), a charge card as defined in the Banking Act and a stored value facility as defined in the Payment Systems (Oversight) Act (Cap. 222A); and

(ii) a debit card and an automated teller machine (ATM) card.

For greater certainty, both the physical and electronic forms of the cards or facility as listed in subparagraphs (j)(i) and (j)(ii) above would be included as a payment card.

(k) For the United States, a credit card, charge card, debit card, cheque card, automated teller machine (ATM) card, prepaid card, and other physical or electronic products or services for performing a similar function as such cards, and the unique account number associated with that card, product or service.

(l) For Viet Nam, a credit card, debit card or prepaid card, in physical form or electronic format, as defined under the laws and regulations of Viet Nam for cards issued inside or outside the territory of Viet Nam using an international Issuer Identification Number or Bank Identification Number (international IIN or BIN).[35]

(i) Viet Nam shall allow the issuance of such cards using international IIN or BIN subject to conditions that are no more restrictive than the conditions applied to the issuance of such cards not using international IIN or BIN.

(ii) For greater certainty, nothing in this commitment restricts the right of Viet Nam to adopt or maintain measures, in addition to the measures set out in Section D, that condition the cross-border supply of such electronic payment services into Viet Nam by a service supplier of another Party on the provision of information and data to the Government of Viet Nam, for public policy purposes, regarding transactions that the supplier processes, provided that such measures are not used as a means of avoiding Viet Nam’s obligation under Section D.

SECTION E: TRANSPARENCY CONSIDERATIONS

In developing a new regulation of general application to which this Chapter applies, a Party may consider, in a manner consistent with its laws and regulations, comments regarding how the proposed regulation may affect the operations of financial institutions, including financial institutions of the Party or other Parties. These comments may include:

(a) submissions to a Party by another Party regarding its regulatory measures that are related to the objectives of the proposed regulation; or

(b) submissions to a Party by interested persons, including other Parties or financial institutions of other Parties, with regard to the potential effects of the proposed regulation.

Annex 11-C

Non-Conforming Measures Ratchet Mechanism

1. Notwithstanding Article 11.10.1(c) (Non-Conforming Measures), for Viet Nam for three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it:

(a) Article 11.3 (National Treatment), Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions) and Article 11.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) shall not apply to an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 11.10.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed at the time of entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam, with Article 11.3 (National Treatment), Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions) and Article 11.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors);

(b) Viet Nam shall not withdraw a right or benefit from:

(i) a financial institution of another Party;

(ii) investors of another Party, and investments of such investors, in financial institutions in Viet Nam’s territory; or

(iii) cross-border financial service suppliers of another Party,

in reliance on which the investor or covered investment has taken any concrete action,[36] through an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 11.10.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) that decreases the conformity of the measure as it existed immediately before the amendment; and

(c) Viet Nam shall provide to the other Parties the details of any amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in Article 11.10.1(a) (Non-Conforming Measures) that would decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, at least 90 days before making the amendment.

Annex 11-D

Authorities Responsible for Financial Services

The authorities for each Party responsible for financial services are:

(a) for Australia, the Treasury and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade;

(b) for Brunei Darussalam, the Monetary Authority of Brunei Darussalam (Autoriti Monetari Brunei Darussalam);

(c) for Canada, the Department of Finance of Canada;

(d) for Chile, the Ministry of Finance (Ministerio de Hacienda);

(e) for Japan, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Financial Services Agency, or their successors;

(f) for Malaysia, Bank Negara Malaysia and the Securities Commission Malaysia;

(g) for Mexico, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público);

(h) for New Zealand, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, in coordination with financial services regulators;

(i) for Peru, the Ministry of Economy and Finance (Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas), in coordination with financial regulators;

(j) for Singapore, the Monetary Authority of Singapore;

(k) for United States, the Department of the Treasury for purposes of Article 11.22 (Investment Disputes in Financial Services) and for all matters involving banking, securities, and financial services other than insurance, the Department of the Treasury, in cooperation with the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, for insurance matters; and

(l) for Viet Nam, the State Bank of Viet Nam and the Ministry of Finance.

Annex 11-E

1. Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Mexico and Peru do not consent to the submission of a claim to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) for a breach of Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), as incorporated into this Chapter, in relation to any act or fact that took place or any situation that ceased to exist before:

(a) the fifth anniversary of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Brunei Darussalam, Chile and Peru, respectively; and

(b) the seventh anniversary of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Mexico.

2. If an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) that Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Mexico or Peru has breached Article 9.6 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), as incorporated into this Chapter, it may not recover for loss or damage that it incurred before:

(a) the fifth anniversary of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Brunei Darussalam, Chile and Peru, respectively; and

(b) the seventh anniversary of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Mexico.

[1] For greater certainty, the Parties understand that an investor “attempts to make” an investment when that investor has taken concrete action or actions to make an investment, such as channelling resources or capital in order to set up a business, or applying for permits or licenses.

[2] For greater certainty, Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) shall not apply to cross-border trade in financial services.

[3] With respect to Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Mexico and Peru, Annex 11-E applies.

[4] For greater certainty, if an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment): (1) as referenced in Article 9.23.7 (Conduct of the Arbitration), the investor has the burden of proving all elements of its claims, consistent with general principles of international law applicable to international investment arbitration; (2) pursuant to Article 9.23.4, a tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favour of the claimant may be made under Article 9.29 (Awards); and (3) pursuant to Article 9.23.6, the tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection and, in determining whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider whether either the claimant’s claim or the respondent’s objection was frivolous and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

[5] For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 11.3 (National Treatment) or Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between investors, investments, financial institutions or financial service suppliers on the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.

[6] Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of financial services.

[7] The Parties understand that nothing in this Article prevents a financial institution of a Party from applying to another Party to request that it authorise the supply of a financial service that is not supplied in the territory of any Party. That application shall be subject to the law of the Party to which the application is made and, for greater certainty, shall not be subject to this Article.

[8] For greater certainty, a Party may issue a new regulation or other subordinate measure in permitting the supply of the new financial service.

[9] With respect to Viet Nam, Annex 11-C applies.

[10] The Parties understand that the term “prudential reasons” includes the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility of individual financial institutions or cross-border financial service suppliers as well as the safety, and financial and operational integrity of payment and clearing systems.

[11] For greater certainty, if a measure challenged under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) is determined to have been adopted or maintained by a Party for prudential reasons in accordance with procedures in Article 11.22 (Investment Disputes in Financial Services), a tribunal shall find that the measure is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations in the Agreement and accordingly shall not award any damages with respect to that measure.

[12] For greater certainty, nothing in Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed to require a Party to accord recognition to prudential measures of any other Party.

[13] For greater certainty, a Party may address those comments collectively on an official government website.

[14] For the purposes of this Article, “joint determination” means a determination by the authorities responsible for financial services of the respondent and of the Party of the claimant, as set out in Annex 11-D (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services). If, within 14 days of the date of the receipt of a request for a joint determination, another Party provides a written notice to the respondent and the Party of the claimant indicating its substantial interest in the matter subject to the request, that other Party’s authorities responsible for financial services may participate in discussions regarding the matter. The joint determination shall be made by the authorities responsible for financial services of the respondent and the Party of the claimant.

[15] For greater certainty, Canada requires that a cross-border financial services supplier maintain a local agent and records in Canada.

[16] The Parties understand that if the financial information or financial data processing referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) involve personal data, the treatment of such personal data shall be in accordance with Chilean law regulating the protection of such data.

[17] Insurance intermediation services may be supplied only for insurance contracts allowed to be supplied in Japan.

[18] Solicitation must be conducted by securities firms in Japan.

[19] For greater certainty, the electronic payment services for payment card transactions referred to in this commitment fall within subcategory 71593 of the United Nations Central Product Classification, Version 2.0, and include only the processing of financial transactions such as verification of financial balances, authorisation of transactions, notification of banks (or credit card issuers) of individual transactions and the provision of daily summaries and instructions regarding the net financial position of relevant institutions for authorised transactions.

[20] The Parties understand that if the financial information or financial data processing referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) involve personal data, the treatment of such personal data shall be in accordance with Mexican law regulating the protection of such data.

[21] The Parties understand that advisory and other auxiliary financial services do not include those services referred to in subparagraphs (e) through (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

[22] Peru reserves the right to apply this Annex under conditions of reciprocity.

[23] The Parties understand that, if the financial information or financial data processing referred to in paragraph 2 of this Annex involves personal data, the treatment of such personal data shall be in accordance with Peru’s law regulating the protection of such data and Section B of Annex 11-B (Specific Commitments).

[24] The Parties understand that advisory and other auxiliary financial services do not include those services referred to in subparagraphs (e) through (o) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

[25] The Parties understand that a trading platform, whether electronic or physical, does not fall within the range of services specified in this paragraph.

[26] For greater certainty, if the financial information or financial data processing referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) pertain to outsourcing arrangements or involves personal data, the outsourcing arrangements and treatment of personal data shall be in accordance with the Monetary Authority of Singapore’s regulatory requirements and guidelines on outsourcing and Singapore’s law regulating the protection of such data, respectively. These regulatory requirements and guidelines shall not derogate from the commitments undertaken by Singapore in paragraph 2 and Section B of Annex 11-B (Specific Commitments).

[27] The Parties understand that if the financial information or financial data processing referred to in subparagraph (a) involve personal data, the treatment of such personal data shall be in accordance with Vietnamese laws regulating the protection of such data.

[28] For greater certainty, a Party may require a collective investment scheme or a person of a Party involved in the operation of the scheme located in the Party’s territory to retain ultimate responsibility for the management of the collective investment scheme.

[29] In Canada, a financial institution organised in the territory of another Party can only provide custodial services to a collective investment scheme located in Canada if the financial institution has shareholders equity equivalent to at least CAD $100 million.

[30] Custodial services are included in the scope of the specific commitment made by New Zealand under this Annex only with respect to investments for which the primary market is outside the territory of the Party.

[31] Custodial services are included in the scope of the specific commitment made by the United States under this Annex only with respect to investments for which the primary market is outside the territory of the Party.

[32] For greater certainty, this requirement is without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation.

[33] For greater certainty, the electronic payment services for payment card transactions referred to in this commitment fall within subparagraph (h) of the definition of “financial service” in Article 11.1 (Definitions), and within subcategory 71593 of the United Nations Central Product Classification, Version 2.0, and include only the processing of financial transactions such as verification of financial balances, authorisation of transactions, notification of banks (or credit card issuers) of individual transactions and the provision of daily summaries and instructions regarding the net financial position of relevant institutions for authorised transactions.

[34] Such registration, authorisation and continued operation, for new and existing suppliers can be conditioned, for example: (i) on supervisory cooperation with the home country supervisor; and (ii) the supplier in a timely manner providing a Party’s relevant financial regulators with the ability to examine, including onsite, the systems, hardware, software and records specifically related to that supplier’s cross-border supply of electronic payment services into the Party.

[35] For the purposes of this subparagraph, “international Issuer Identification Number or Bank Identification Number” and “international IIN or BIN” mean a number that is assigned to a service supplier of another Party pursuant to the relevant standards adopted by the International Standards Organization.

[36] Concrete action includes the channelling of resources or capital in order to establish or expand a business and applying for permits and licences.


*************** Chapter 12 ***************

--- Temporary Entry for Business Persons ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/3559e41ae388)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

As businesses seek to establish and develop opportunities across the region, they need to obtain visas. The Temporary Entry for Business Persons chapter ensures efficient visa processing procedures and transparency related to requirements for the temporary entry application process. No provision in TPP will require changes to U.S. immigration law, regulations, policy, or practice because our system already operates in a manner consistent with the provisions in the Temporary Entry chapter. In addition, while the other 11 TPP Parties have agreed upon country-specific reciprocal commitments on access for each other’s business persons, the United States is not undertaking any commitments in this area.

Overview

Application Procedures

The Temporary Entry for Business Persons chapter encourages TPP authorities to promptly provide information on applications for temporary entry, to ensure that application fees are reasonable, and to make decisions on applications and inform applicants of decisions in a timely manner, as we already do in the United States.

Transparency

The chapter includes commitments to ensure that information on requirements for temporary entry are readily available to the public, including by publishing information promptly and online if possible, and providing explanatory materials and specifying where inquiries should be directed relating to temporary entry measures. This is fully consistent with U.S. practice.

New Features

TPP’s Temporary Entry for Business Persons chapter provides enhanced transparency and opportunities for enhanced cooperation among the TPP countries on these issues.

Impact

The Asia-Pacific region is already the largest business travel region in the world, based upon travel spending, and according to one industry group, business travel is expected to grow by around six percent annually over the next five years. For Americans, the importance of personal connections, small-business contacts, and coordination for building successful business relationships is highlighted by the fact that Americans made more than 61 million foreign trips in 2013.

As businesses seek to establish and develop opportunities across the region, they need to obtain visas efficiently. To address this issue, the Temporary Entry for Business Persons chapter ensures efficient visa processing procedures and transparency-related requirements for the temporary entry application process. While the other 11 Parties have agreed upon country-specific reciprocal commitments on access for each other’s business persons, the United States is not undertaking any commitments in this area. Nor will any TPP provision require changes to U.S. immigration law, regulations, policy, or practice, as our system already operates in a manner consistent with the temporary entry chapter. In addition, TPP will explicitly affirm the ability of TPP Parties to regulate the entry of foreign nationals into their territory.

Article 12.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

business person means:

(a) a natural person who has the nationality of a Party according to Annex 1-A (Party-Specific Definitions), or

(b) a permanent resident of a Party that, prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement, has made a notification consistent with Article XXVIII(k)(ii)(2) of GATS that that Party accords substantially the same treatment to its permanent residents as it does to its nationals,[1]

who is engaged in trade in goods, the supply of services or the conduct of investment activities;

immigration formality means a visa, permit, pass or other document or electronic authority granting temporary entry;

immigration measure means any measure affecting the entry and stay of foreign nationals; and

temporary entry means entry into the territory of a Party by a business person of another Party who does not intend to establish permanent residence.

Article 12.2: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures that affect the temporary entry of business persons of a Party into the territory of another Party.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the employment market of another Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship, nationality, residence or employment on a permanent basis.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of natural persons of another Party into, or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across, its borders, provided that those measures are not applied in a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to any Party under this Chapter.

4. The sole fact that a Party requires business persons of another Party to obtain an immigration formality shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing the benefits accruing to any Party under this Chapter.

Article 12.3: Application Procedures

1. As expeditiously as possible after receipt of a completed application for an immigration formality, each Party shall make a decision on the application and inform the applicant of the decision including, if approved, the period of stay and other conditions.

2. At the request of an applicant, a Party that has received a completed application for an immigration formality shall endeavour to promptly provide information concerning the status of the application.

3. Each Party shall ensure that fees charged by its competent authorities for the processing of an application for an immigration formality are reasonable, in that they do not unduly impair or delay trade in goods or services or conduct of investment activities under this Agreement.

Article 12.4: Grant of Temporary Entry

1. Each Party shall set out in Annex 12-A the commitments it makes with regard to temporary entry of business persons, which shall specify the conditions and limitations for entry and temporary stay, including length of stay, for each category of business persons specified by that Party.

2. A Party shall grant temporary entry or extension of temporary stay to business persons of another Party to the extent provided for in those commitments made pursuant to paragraph 1, provided that those business persons:

(a) follow the granting Party’s prescribed application procedures for the relevant immigration formality; and

(b) meet all relevant eligibility requirements for temporary entry or extension of temporary stay.

3. The sole fact that a Party grants temporary entry to a business person of another Party pursuant to this Chapter shall not be construed to exempt that business person from meeting any applicable licensing or other requirements, including any mandatory codes of conduct, to practise a profession or otherwise engage in business activities.

4. A Party may refuse to issue an immigration formality to a business person of another Party if the temporary entry of that person might affect adversely:

(a) the settlement of any labour dispute that is in progress at the place or intended place of employment; or

(b) the employment of any natural person who is involved in such dispute.

5. When a Party refuses pursuant to paragraph 4 to issue an immigration formality, it shall inform the applicant accordingly.

Article 12.5: Business Travel

The Parties affirm their commitments to each other in the context of APEC to enhance the mobility of business persons, including through exploration and voluntary development of trusted traveller programmes, and their support for efforts to enhance the APEC Business Travel Card programme.

Article 12.6: Provision of Information

Further to Article 26.2 (Publication) and Article 26.5 (Provision of Information), each Party shall:

(a) promptly publish online if possible or otherwise make publicly available, information on:

(i) current requirements for temporary entry under this Chapter, including explanatory material and relevant forms and documents that will enable interested persons of the other Parties to become acquainted with those requirements; and

(ii) the typical timeframe within which an application for an immigration formality is processed; and

(b) establish or maintain appropriate mechanisms to respond to enquiries from interested persons regarding measures relating to temporary entry covered by this Chapter.

Article 12.7: Committee on Temporary Entry for Business Persons

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Temporary Entry for Business Persons (Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall meet once every three years, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, to:

(a) review the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) consider opportunities for the Parties to further facilitate temporary entry of business persons, including through the development of activities undertaken pursuant to Article 12.8 (Cooperation); and

(c) consider any other matter arising under this Chapter.

3. A Party may request discussions with one or more other Parties with a view to advancing the objectives set out in paragraph 2. Those discussions may take place at a time and location agreed by the Parties involved in those discussions.

Article 12.8: Cooperation

Recognising that the Parties can benefit from sharing their diverse experience in developing and applying procedures related to visa processing and border security, the Parties shall consider undertaking mutually agreed cooperation activities, subject to available resources, including by:

(a) providing advice on the development and implementation of electronic processing systems for visas;

(b) sharing experiences with regulations, and the implementation of programmes and technology related to:

(i) border security, including those related to the use of biometric technology, advanced passenger information systems, frequent passenger programmes and security in travel documents; and

(ii) the expediting of certain categories of applicants in order to reduce facility and workload constraints; and

(c) cooperating in multilateral fora to promote processing enhancements, such as those listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b).

Article 12.9: Relation to Other Chapters

1. Except for this Chapter, Chapter 1 (Initial Provisions and General Definitions), Chapter 27 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions), Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement), Chapter 30 (Final Provisions), Article 26.2 (Publication) and Article 26.5 (Provision of Information), no provision of this Agreement shall impose any obligation on a Party regarding its immigration measures.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 12.10: Dispute Settlement

1. No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) regarding a refusal to grant temporary entry unless:

(a) the matter involves a pattern of practice; and

(b) the business persons affected have exhausted all available administrative remedies regarding the particular matter.

2. The remedies referred to in paragraph 1(b) shall be deemed to be exhausted if a final determination in the matter has not been issued by the other Party within a reasonable period of time after the date of the institution of proceedings for the remedy, including any proceedings for review or appeal, and the failure to issue such a determination is not attributable to delays caused by the business persons concerned.

[1] For the purposes of subparagraph (b), “nationals” has the meaning it bears in Article XXVIII(k)(ii)(2) of GATS.

Annex 12-A: Temporary Entry for Business Persons

AustraliaBruneiCanadaChileJapanMalaysiaMexicoNew ZealandPeruSingaporeViet Nam


*************** Chapter 13 ***************

--- Telecommunications ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/ec0acffa4a78)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Telecommunications chapter will help build a strong framework of trade rules to help ensure the competitive supply of telecommunications services across the TPP region, benefiting U.S. telecommunications operators who seek to operate in TPP markets, and all those industries in the U.S. that stand to gain from hundreds of millions of potential new customers accessible to them by such networks. This framework ensures that competition can take root and that anticompetitive conduct is discouraged. It also encourages innovative market-based solutions, to promote experimenting with new technologies and allow market forces to deliver services more quickly, more effectively, and more economically. And it extends pro-competitive principles to mobile services — the fastest-growing sector of the industry, which will be the major point of access to Internet and other services for most of the world’s people in coming years.

Overview

Reasonable access to networks of other suppliers

In a competitive environment, telecommunications depends on the ability of suppliers to access each other’s facilities and services. Operators need to interconnect with each other, which often requires access to a competitors’ physical infrastructure where the two networks can meet. But an incumbent operator often has an incentive not to cooperate, and instead to hinder a competitor. TPP’s Telecommunications chapter accordingly includes provisions intended to ensure that companies offer such access on a reasonable and timely basis.

Fair access to government-controlled resources

Telecommunications services are impossible to provide without access to resources usually controlled by a government: spectrum, rights of way, and phone numbers, among others. The Telecommunications chapter ensures that U.S. suppliers will have equal access to such necessary resources — that the regulator does not favor local suppliers by offering preferential access, and thus impedes competition.

Transparency in rulemaking

Where services are regulated, a transparent process for developing and enforcing rules, with rights of appeal, are critical to ensuring vibrant competition. The Telecommunications chapter ensures the opportunity for stakeholders on all sides to provide input, including for innovative suppliers to demonstrate how they can meet policy objectives more efficiently, for example through the use of technology, or innovative service offerings.

Suppliers’ freedom to innovate

Restrictions on technology, often imposed to favor domestic suppliers or technical standards, have hurt U.S. service companies and equipment makers in many markets. The Telecommunications chapter ensures that regulation is impartial across different technologies, helping to ensure that freedom to innovate is the rule. Given U.S. companies’ long experience in bringing cutting-edge technologies to market, and the comparative advantage they possess in this sector, this provision will help ensure that U.S. suppliers can compete effectively in foreign markets.

Principle of market-based approach to regulation

TPP countries agree to adopt the principle that in telecommunications, reliance on market forces and commercial negotiations are the preferred means of achieving policy goals, absent market failure or monopolistic behavior. This reflects the approach of the United States. In many cases, this approach provides more freedom for new entrants to innovate.

Cooperation of International Mobile Roaming

To promote competition in the telecommunications sector, the chapter secures commitments from TPP Parties to facilitate the use of alternatives to roaming (i.e., preventing operators from blocking of voice over the Internet (VoIP) services, or disabling Wi-Fi services). In addition, while the United States does not regulate mobile services, where Parties seek to negotiate bilateral roaming rates between two markets, TPP Parties agree to permit operators from the United States or other third countries to benefit from the lower rates.

New Features

For the first time in a Free Trade Agreement (FTA), TPP extends pro-competitive network access rules to mobile suppliers. While not directly applicable to the United States because of the competitive nature of our mobile market, this step closes a loophole that has prevented the use of trade disciplines in markets where a dominant mobile operator has been able to thwart competition. Given the interest among U.S. suppliers in entering this subsector in foreign markets and the interest of consumers in accessing innovative products at competitive rates, we expect this to be an important innovation.

In addition, consumer complaints about unreasonable mobile roaming rates, affecting both voice and data services, spurred TPP Parties to seek greater cooperation in helping bring competitive forces to bear on such rates, which are the bane of tourist and business travelers alike, and are often a disincentive to using telecommunications services. TPP is the first FTA to address this issue.

Impact

Robust networks and competitively priced telecommunications services are essential to a 21st-century economy — and the quality and innovative capacity of American telecommunications should enable American workers and businesses to serve consumers across the Asia-Pacific region. High-quality telecommunications drive growth and innovation; allow supply chains and precision logistics to function, provide a platform for the digital economy, which is especially important to small and medium-sized companies; and connect American producers — and consumers — directly to consumers and industrial, agricultural, entertainment, and services markets. The growth and innovation of the U.S. telecommunications sector has derived from pioneering policies of promoting competition and giving both services suppliers and equipment-makers freedom to introduce new technologies. These policies have helped create, in the United States, the largest market by far (by revenue) for information and communications technologies (ICT). [1]

TPP countries are a natural growth opportunity for the American ICT sector, in both goods and services. Telecommunications services alone are worth over $300 billion annually in our 11 TPP partners’ markets — on average 3 percent of their GDP — providing a gateway to Internet-enabled services and products that have enormous growth and revenue potential, from social networking, to gaming, to cloud computing. Looking ahead, these countries include some of the world’s fastest-growing rates of telecom use — from 2009 to 2014, mobile subscription totals have risen from 98 million to 136 million in Vietnam, and Internet access rose from 27 percent to 48 percent of the Vietnamese public. Mexico’s figures are comparable, with mobile subscription totals rising from 83 million to 102 million in Mexico, and Internet access from 26 percent to 44 percent of the public. Nor are these figures unique to developing countries: Japanese mobile subscriptions rose from 116 million to 153 million over the same period. And beyond the TPP countries themselves, TPP offers an opportunity to promote competition and support innovation in areas from Internet services to smartphones and tablets and their associated applications and content.

Building these networks means overcoming a range of potential impediments that appear in TPP countries, the Asia-Pacific region, and worldwide, often as a result of government policies. These include prohibitions on investment, or constraints on access to key resources such as spectrum, numbers or rights of ways; or anti-competitive conduct pursued by incumbent players, who can use control over key bottlenecks such as interconnection, roaming arrangements, and access to specific facilities to disadvantage competitors. TPP accordingly addresses both barriers to entry to markets, and policy challenges within markets:

Entry to Markets

Even when a market is nominally open to investment in the telecommunications sector, new entrants often face enormous challenges in getting a foothold. In addition to obtaining a license, a new entrant typically has to rely, in part, on existing operators to reach customers. In such circumstances the opportunities to thwart a competitor are legion. Some of these obstacles are physical — access to buildings, rights of ways, and particular equipment necessary to lay down lines and physically interconnect one network with another. Other obstacles are financial or operational, including lack of access to leased lines and interconnection arrangements.

Policy Barriers

Other obstacles relate to a governments’ willingness to offer fair access to scarce resources — spectrum, numbers, and government-controlled rightsof-ways that a new entrant may need in order to offer its services. And finally, both existing operators and government regulators may see new technologies as a threat or as something they cannot adequately control or oversee, hurting the ability of innovative operators to introduce offerings for which technology is their competitive advantage.

[1] See OECD, Key ICT Indicators http://www.oecd.org/sti/broadband/oecdkeyictindicators.htm

Article 13.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

commercial mobile services means public telecommunications services supplied through mobile wireless means;

cost-oriented means based on cost, and may include a reasonable profit, and may involve different cost methodologies for different facilities or services;

end-user means a final consumer of or subscriber to a public telecommunications service, including a service supplier other than a supplier of public telecommunications services;

enterprise means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.3 (General Definitions) and a branch of an enterprise;

essential facilities means facilities of a public telecommunications network or service that:

(a) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single or limited number of suppliers, and

(b) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order to supply a service;

interconnection means linking with suppliers providing public telecommunications services in order to allow the users of one supplier to communicate with users of another supplier and to access services provided by another supplier;

international mobile roaming service means a commercial mobile service provided pursuant to a commercial agreement between suppliers of public telecommunications services that enables end-users to use their home mobile handset or other device for voice, data or messaging services while outside the territory in which the end-user’s home public telecommunications network is located;

leased circuit means a telecommunications facility between two or more designated points that is set aside for the dedicated use of, or availability to, a user and supplied by a supplier of a fixed telecommunications service;

licence means any authorisation that a Party may require of a person, in accordance with its laws and regulations, in order for that person to offer a telecommunications service, including concessions, permits or registrations;

major supplier means a supplier of public telecommunications services that has the ability to materially affect the terms of participation (having regard to price and supply) in the relevant market for public telecommunications services as a result of:

(a) control over essential facilities, or

(b) use of its position in the market;

network element means a facility or equipment used in supplying a fixed public telecommunications service, including features, functions and capabilities provided by means of that facility or equipment;

non-discriminatory means treatment no less favourable than that accorded to any other user of like public telecommunications services in like circumstances, including with respect to timeliness;

number portability means the ability of end-users of public telecommunications services to retain, at the same location, the same telephone numbers when switching between the same category of suppliers of public telecommunications services;

physical co-location means physical access to and control over space in order to install, maintain or repair equipment, at premises owned or controlled and used by a major supplier to provide public telecommunications services;

public telecommunications network means telecommunications infrastructure used to provide public telecommunications services between defined network termination points;

public telecommunications service means any telecommunications service that a Party requires, explicitly or in effect, to be offered to the public generally. These services may include telephone and data transmission typically involving transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more defined points without any end-to-end change in the form or content of the customer’s information;

reference interconnection offer means an interconnection offer extended by a major supplier and filed with, approved by or determined by a telecommunications regulatory body that sufficiently details the terms, rates and conditions for interconnection so that a supplier of public telecommunications services that is willing to accept it may obtain interconnection with the major supplier on that basis, without having to engage in negotiations with the major supplier concerned;

telecommunications means the transmission and reception of signals by any electromagnetic means, including by photonic means;

telecommunications regulatory body means a body or bodies responsible for the regulation of telecommunications;

user means a service consumer or a service supplier; and

virtual co-location means an arrangement whereby a requesting supplier that seeks co-location may specify equipment to be used in the premises of a major supplier but does not obtain physical access to those premises and allows the major supplier to install, maintain and repair that equipment.

Article 13.2: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to:

(a) any measure relating to access to and use of public telecommunications services;

(b) any measure relating to obligations regarding suppliers of public telecommunications services; and

(c) any other measure relating to telecommunications services.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to any measure relating to broadcast or cable distribution of radio or television programming, except that:

(a) Article 13.4.1 (Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Services) shall apply with respect to a cable or broadcast service supplier’s access to and use of public telecommunications services; and

(b) Article 13.22 (Transparency) shall apply to any technical measure to the extent that the measure also affects public telecommunications services.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to:

(a) require a Party, or require a Party to compel any enterprise, to establish, construct, acquire, lease, operate or provide a telecommunications network or service not offered to the public generally;[1]

(b) require a Party to compel any enterprise exclusively engaged in the broadcast or cable distribution of radio or television programming to make available its broadcast or cable facilities as a public telecommunications network; or

(c) prevent a Party from prohibiting a person who operates a private network from using its private network to supply a public telecommunications network or service to third persons.

4. Annex 13-A (Rural Telephone Suppliers — United States) and Annex 13-B (Rural Telephone Suppliers — Peru) include additional provisions relating to the scope of this Chapter.

Article 13.3: Approaches to Regulation

1. The Parties recognise the value of competitive markets to deliver a wide choice in the supply of telecommunications services and to enhance consumer welfare, and that economic regulation may not be needed if there is effective competition or if a service is new to a market. Accordingly, the Parties recognise that regulatory needs and approaches differ market by market, and that each Party may determine how to implement its obligations under this Chapter.

2. In this respect, the Parties recognise that a Party may:

(a) engage in direct regulation either in anticipation of an issue that the Party expects may arise or to resolve an issue that has already arisen in the market;

(b) rely on the role of market forces, particularly with respect to market segments that are, or are likely to be, competitive or that have low barriers to entry, such as services provided by telecommunications suppliers that do not own network facilities;[2] or

(c) use any other appropriate means that benefit the long-term interest of end-users.

3. When a Party engages in direct regulation, it may nonetheless forbear, to the extent provided for in its law, from applying that regulation to a service that the Party classifies as a public telecommunications service, if its telecommunications regulatory body or other competent body determines that:

(a) enforcement of the regulation is not necessary to prevent unreasonable or discriminatory practices;

(b) enforcement of the regulation is not necessary for the protection of consumers; and

(c) forbearance is consistent with the public interest, including promoting and enhancing competition between suppliers of public telecommunications services.

Article 13.4: Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Services[3]

1. Each Party shall ensure that any enterprise of another Party has access to and use of any public telecommunications service, including leased circuits, offered in its territory or across its borders, on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions.

2. Each Party shall ensure that any service supplier of another Party is permitted to:

(a) purchase or lease, and attach terminal or other equipment that interfaces with a public telecommunications network;

(b) provide services to individual or multiple end-users over leased or owned circuits;

(c) connect leased or owned circuits with public telecommunications networks and services or with circuits leased or owned by another enterprise[4];

(d) perform switching, signalling, processing and conversion functions; and

(e) use operating protocols of their choice.

3. Each Party shall ensure that an enterprise of any Party may use public telecommunications services for the movement of information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate communications, and for access to information contained in databases or otherwise stored in machine-readable form in the territory of any Party.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may take measures that are necessary to ensure the security and confidentiality of messages and to protect the privacy of personal data of end-users of public telecommunications networks or services, provided that those measures are not applied in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade in services.

5. Each Party shall ensure that no condition is imposed on access to and use of public telecommunications networks and services, other than as necessary to:

(a) safeguard the public service responsibilities of suppliers of public telecommunications networks and services, in particular their ability to make their networks or services generally available to the public; or

(b) protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or services.

6. Provided that they satisfy the criteria set out in paragraph 5, conditions for access to and use of public telecommunications networks and services may include:

(a) a requirement to use a specified technical interface, including an interface protocol, for connection with those networks or services;

(b) a requirement, when necessary, for the inter-operability of those networks and services;

(c) type approval of terminal or other equipment that interfaces with the network and technical requirements relating to the attachment of that equipment to those networks; and

(d) a licensing, permit, registration or notification procedure which, if adopted or maintained, is transparent and provides for the processing of applications filed thereunder in accordance with a Party’s laws or regulations.

Article 13.5: Obligations Relating to Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services

Interconnection[5]

1. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services in its territory provide, directly or indirectly within the same territory, interconnection with suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party.

2. Each Party shall provide its telecommunications regulatory body with the authority to require interconnection at reasonable rates.

3. In carrying out paragraph 1, each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services in its territory take reasonable steps to protect the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information of, or relating to, suppliers and end-users of public telecommunications services obtained as a result of interconnection arrangements and that those suppliers only use that information for the purpose of providing these services.

Number Portability

4. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services in its territory provide number portability without impairment to quality and reliability, on a timely basis, and on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions. [6]

Access to Numbers

5. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party established in its territory are afforded access to telephone numbers on a non-discriminatory basis.[7]

Article 13.6: International Mobile Roaming

1. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on promoting transparent and reasonable rates for international mobile roaming services that can help promote the growth of trade among the Parties and enhance consumer welfare.

2. A Party may choose to take steps to enhance transparency and competition with respect to international mobile roaming rates and technological alternatives to roaming services, such as:

(a) ensuring that information regarding retail rates is easily accessible to consumers; and

(b) minimising impediments to the use of technological alternatives to roaming, whereby consumers when visiting the territory of a Party from the territory of another Party can access telecommunications services using the device of their choice.

3. The Parties recognise that a Party, when it has the authority to do so, may choose to adopt or maintain measures affecting rates for wholesale international roaming services with a view to ensuring that those rates are reasonable. If a Party considers it appropriate, it may cooperate on and implement mechanisms with other Parties to facilitate the implementation of those measures, including by entering into arrangements with those Parties.

4. If a Party (the first Party) chooses to regulate rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services, it shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications services of another Party (the second Party) has access to the regulated rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services for its customers roaming in the territory of the first Party in circumstances in which:[8]

(a) the second Party has entered into an arrangement with the first Party to reciprocally regulate rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services for suppliers of the two Parties;[9] or

(b) in the absence of an arrangement of the type referred to in subparagraph (a), the supplier of public telecommunications services of the second Party, of its own accord:

(i) makes available to suppliers of public telecommunications services of the first Party wholesale international mobile roaming services at rates or conditions that are reasonably comparable to the regulated rates or conditions;[10] and

(ii) meets any additional requirements that the first Party imposes with respect to the availability of the regulated rates or conditions.[11]

The first Party may require suppliers of the second Party to fully utilise commercial negotiations to reach agreement on the terms for accessing such rates or conditions.

5. A Party that ensures access to regulated rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services in accordance with paragraph 4 shall be deemed to be in compliance with its obligations under Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 13.4.1 (Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Services), and Article 13.7 (Treatment by Major Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services) with respect to international mobile roaming services.

6. Each Party shall provide to the other Parties information on rates for retail international mobile roaming services for voice, data and text messages offered to consumers of the Party when visiting the territories of the other Parties. A Party shall provide that information no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for the Party. Each Party shall update that information and provide it to the other Parties on an annual basis or as otherwise agreed. Interested Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on compiling this information into a report to be mutually agreed by the Parties and to be made publicly available.

7. Nothing in this Article shall require a Party to regulate rates or conditions for international mobile roaming services.

Article 13.7: Treatment by Major Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services

Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory accords suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party treatment no less favourable than that major supplier accords in like circumstances to its subsidiaries, its affiliates or non-affiliated service suppliers regarding:

(a) the availability, provisioning, rates or quality of like public telecommunications services; and

(b) the availability of technical interfaces necessary for interconnection.

Article 13.8: Competitive Safeguards

1. Each Party shall maintain appropriate measures for the purpose of preventing suppliers of public telecommunications services that, alone or together, are a major supplier in its territory from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices.

2. The anti-competitive practices referred to in paragraph 1 include in particular:

(a) engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation;

(b) using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results; and

(c) not making available, on a timely basis, to suppliers of public telecommunications services, technical information about essential facilities and commercially relevant information that are necessary for them to provide services.

Article 13.9: Resale

1. No Party shall prohibit the resale of any public telecommunications service.[12]

2. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory:

(a) offers for resale, at reasonable rates,[13] to suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party, public telecommunications services that the major supplier provides at retail to end-users; and

(b) does not impose unreasonable or discriminatory conditions or limitations on the resale of those services.[14]

3. Each Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which public telecommunications services must be offered for resale by major suppliers pursuant to paragraph 2, based on the need to promote competition or to benefit the long-term interests of end-users.

4. If a Party does not require that a major supplier offer a specific public telecommunications service for resale, it nonetheless shall allow service suppliers to request that the service be offered for resale consistent with paragraph 2, without prejudice to the Party’s decision on the request.

Article 13.10: Unbundling of Network Elements by Major Suppliers

Each Party shall provide its telecommunications regulatory body or another appropriate body with the authority to require a major supplier in its territory to offer to public telecommunications service suppliers access to network elements on an unbundled basis on terms and conditions, and at cost-oriented rates, that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent for the supply of public telecommunications services. Each Party may determine the network elements required to be made available in its territory, and the suppliers that may obtain those elements, in accordance with its laws and regulations.

Article 13.11: Interconnection with Major Suppliers

General Terms and Conditions

1. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides interconnection for the facilities and equipment of suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party:

(a) at any technically feasible point in the major supplier’s network;

(b) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications) and rates;

(c) of a quality no less favourable than that provided by the major supplier for its own like services, for like services of non-affiliated service suppliers, or for its subsidiaries or other affiliates;

(d) in a timely manner, on terms and conditions (including technical standards and specifications), and at cost-oriented rates, that are transparent, reasonable, having regard to economic feasibility, and sufficiently unbundled so that the suppliers do not have to pay for network components or facilities that they do not require for the service to be provided; and

(e) on request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered to the majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of necessary additional facilities.

Options for Interconnecting with Major Suppliers

2. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party with the opportunity to interconnect their facilities and equipment with those of the major supplier through the following options:

(a) a reference interconnection offer or another standard interconnection offer containing the rates, terms and conditions that the major supplier offers generally to suppliers of public telecommunications services; or

(b) the terms and conditions of an interconnection agreement that is in effect.

3. In addition to the options provided in paragraph 2, each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party have the opportunity to interconnect their facilities and equipment with those of the major supplier through the negotiation of a new interconnection agreement.

Public Availability of Interconnection Offers and Agreements

4. Each Party shall make publicly available the applicable procedures for interconnection negotiations with a major supplier in its territory.

5. Each Party shall provide means for suppliers of another Party to obtain the rates, terms and conditions necessary for interconnection offered by a major supplier. Those means include, at a minimum, ensuring:

(a) the public availability of interconnection agreements that are in effect between a major supplier in its territory and other suppliers of public telecommunications services in its territory;

(b) the public availability of rates, terms and conditions for interconnection with a major supplier set by the telecommunications regulatory body or other competent body; or

(c) the public availability of a reference interconnection offer.

Services for which those rates, terms and conditions are made publicly available do not have to include all interconnection-related services offered by a major supplier, as determined by a Party under its laws and regulations.

Article 13.12: Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuits Services by Major Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides to service suppliers of another Party leased circuits services that are public telecommunications services in a reasonable period of time on terms and conditions, and at rates, that are reasonable and non-discriminatory, and based on a generally available offer.

2. Further to paragraph 1, each Party shall provide its telecommunications regulatory body or other appropriate bodies the authority to require a major supplier in its territory to offer leased circuits services that are public telecommunications services to service suppliers of another Party at capacity-based and cost-oriented prices.

Article 13.13: Co-Location by Major Suppliers

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides to suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party in the Party’s territory physical co-location of equipment necessary for interconnection or access to unbundled network elements based on a generally available offer, on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions and at cost-oriented rates, that are reasonable and non-discriminatory.

2. Where physical co-location is not practical for technical reasons or because of space limitations, each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides an alternative solution, such as facilitating virtual co-location, based on a generally available offer, on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions and at cost-oriented rates, that are reasonable and non-discriminatory.

3. A Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which premises owned or controlled by major suppliers in its territory are subject to paragraphs 1 and 2. When the Party makes this determination, it shall take into account factors such as the state of competition in the market where co-location is required, whether those premises can be substituted in an economically or technically feasible manner in order to provide a competing service, or other specified public interest factors.

4. If a Party does not require that a major supplier offer co-location at certain premises, it nonetheless shall allow service suppliers to request that those premises be offered for co-location consistent with paragraph 1, without prejudice to the Party’s decision on such a request.

Article 13.14: Access to Poles, Ducts, Conduits and Rights-of-way Owned or Controlled by Major Suppliers[15]

1. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides access to poles, ducts, conduits, and rights-of-way or any other structures as determined by the Party, owned or controlled by the major supplier, to suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party in the Party’s territory on a timely basis, on terms and conditions and at rates, that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent, subject to technical feasibility.

2. A Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, the poles, ducts, conduits, rights-of-way or any other structures to which it requires major suppliers in its territory to provide access in accordance with paragraph 1. When the Party makes this determination, it shall take into account factors such as the competitive effect of lack of such access, whether such structures can be substituted in an economically or technically feasible manner in order to provide a competing service, or other specified public interest factors.

Article 13.15: International Submarine Cable Systems[16], [17]

Each Party shall ensure that any major supplier who controls international submarine cable landing stations in the Party’s territory provides access to those landing stations, consistent with the provisions of Article 13.11 (Interconnection with Major Suppliers), Article 13.12 (Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuits Services by Major Suppliers), and Article 13.13 (Co-Location by Major Suppliers), to public telecommunications suppliers of another Party.

Article 13.16: Independent Regulatory Bodies and Government Ownership

1. Each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory body is separate from, and not accountable to, any supplier of public telecommunications services. With a view to ensuring the independence and impartiality of telecommunications regulatory bodies, each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory body does not hold a financial interest[18] or maintain an operating or management role[19] in any supplier of public telecommunications services.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the regulatory decisions and procedures of its telecommunications regulatory body or other competent authority related to provisions contained in this Chapter are impartial with respect to all market participants.

3. No Party shall accord more favourable treatment to a supplier of telecommunications services in its territory than that accorded to a like service supplier of another Party on the basis that the supplier receiving more favourable treatment is owned by the national government of the Party.

Article 13.17: Universal Service

Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligation it wishes to maintain. Each Party shall administer any universal service obligation that it maintains in a transparent, non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner, and shall ensure that its universal service obligation is not more burdensome than necessary for the kind of universal service that it has defined.

Article 13.18: Licensing Process

1. If a Party requires a supplier of public telecommunications services to have a licence, the Party shall ensure the public availability of:

(a) all the licensing criteria and procedures that it applies;

(b) the period that it normally requires to reach a decision concerning an application for a licence; and

(c) the terms and conditions of all licences in effect.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, on request, an applicant receives the reasons for the:

(a) denial of a licence;

(b) imposition of supplier-specific conditions on a licence;

(c) revocation of a licence; or

(d) refusal to renew a licence.

Article 13.19: Allocation and Use of Scarce Resources

1. Each Party shall administer its procedures for the allocation and use of scarce telecommunications resources, including frequencies, numbers and rights-of-way, in an objective, timely, transparent and non-discriminatory manner.

2. Each Party shall make publicly available the current state of frequency bands allocated and assigned to specific suppliers[20] but retains the right not to provide detailed identification of frequencies that are allocated or assigned for specific government uses.

3. For greater certainty, a Party’s measures allocating and assigning spectrum and managing frequency are not per se inconsistent with Article 10.5 (Market Access) either as it applies to cross-border trade in services or through the operation of Article 10.2.2 (Scope) to an investor or covered investment of another Party. Accordingly, each Party retains the right to establish and apply spectrum and frequency management policies that may have the effect of limiting the number of suppliers of public telecommunications services, provided that the Party does so in a manner that is consistent with other provisions of this Agreement. This includes the ability to allocate frequency bands, taking into account current and future needs and spectrum availability.

4. When making a spectrum allocation for commercial telecommunications services, each Party shall endeavour to rely on an open and transparent process that considers the public interest, including the promotion of competition. Each Party shall endeavour to rely generally on market-based approaches in assigning spectrum for terrestrial commercial telecommunications services. To this end, each Party shall have the authority to use mechanisms such as auctions, if appropriate, to assign spectrum for commercial use.

Article 13.20: Enforcement

Each Party shall provide its competent authority with the authority to enforce the Party’s measures relating to the obligations set out in Article 13.4 (Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Services), Article 13.5 (Obligations Relating to Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services) , Article 13.7 (Treatment by Major Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services), Article 13.8 (Competitive Safeguards), Article 13.9 (Resale), Article 13.10 (Unbundling of Network Elements by Major Suppliers), Article 13.11 (Interconnection with Major Suppliers), Article 13.12 (Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuits Services by Major Suppliers), Article 13.13 (Co-Location by Major Suppliers), Article 13.14 (Access to Poles, Ducts, Conduits and Rights-of-way Owned or Controlled by Major Suppliers) and Article 13. 15 (International Submarine Cable Systems). That authority shall include the ability to impose effective sanctions, which may include financial penalties, injunctive relief (on an interim or final basis), or the modification, suspension or revocation of licences.

Article 13.21: Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes

1. Further to Articles 26.3 (Administrative Proceedings) and 26.4 (Review and Appeal), each Party shall ensure that:

Recourse

(a) enterprises have recourse to a telecommunications regulatory body or other relevant body of the Party to resolve disputes regarding the Party’s measures relating to matters set out in Article 13.4 (Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Services), Article 13.5 (Obligations Relating to Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services), Article 13.6 (International Mobile Roaming), Article 13.7 (Treatment by Major Suppliers of Public Telecommunications Services), Article 13.8 (Competitive Safeguards), Article 13.9 (Resale), Article 13.10 (Unbundling of Network Elements by Major Suppliers), Article 13.11 (Interconnection with Major Suppliers), Article 13.12 (Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuits Services by Major Suppliers), Article 13.13 (Co-Location by Major Suppliers), Article 13.14 (Access to Poles, Ducts, Conduits and Rights-of-way Owned or Controlled by Major Suppliers) and Article 13.15 (International Submarine Cable Systems);

(b) if a telecommunications regulatory body declines to initiate any action on a request to resolve a dispute, it shall, upon request, provide a written explanation for its decision within a reasonable period of time;[21]

(c) suppliers of public telecommunications services of another Party that have requested interconnection with a major supplier in the Party’s territory may seek review, within a reasonable and publicly specified period of time after the supplier requests interconnection, by its telecommunications regulatory body to resolve disputes regarding the terms, conditions and rates for interconnection with that major supplier; and

Reconsideration[22]

(d) any enterprise whose legally protected interests are adversely affected by a determination or decision of the Party’s telecommunications regulatory body may appeal to or petition the body or other relevant body to reconsider that determination or decision. No Party shall permit the making of an application for reconsideration to constitute grounds for non-compliance with the determination or decision of the telecommunications regulatory body, unless the regulatory or other relevant body issues an order that the determination or decision not be enforced while the proceeding is pending. A Party may limit the circumstances under which reconsideration is available, in accordance with its laws and regulations.

Judicial Review

2. No Party shall permit the making of an application for judicial review to constitute grounds for non-compliance with the determination or decision of the telecommunications regulatory body, unless the judicial body issues an order that the determination or decision not be enforced while the proceeding is pending.

Article 13.22: Transparency

1. Further to Article 26.2.2 (Publication), each Party shall ensure that when its telecommunications regulatory body seeks input[23] for a proposal for a regulation, that body shall:

(a) make the proposal public or otherwise available to any interested persons;

(b) include an explanation of the purpose of and reasons for the proposal;

(c) provide interested persons with adequate public notice of the ability to comment and reasonable opportunity for such comment;

(d) to the extent practicable, make publicly available all relevant comments filed with it; and

(e) respond to all significant and relevant issues raised in comments filed, in the course of issuance of the final regulation.[24]

2. Further to Article 26.2.1 (Publication), each Party shall ensure that its measures relating to public telecommunications services are made publicly available, including:

(a) tariffs and other terms and conditions of service;

(b) specifications of technical interfaces;

(c) conditions for attaching terminal or other equipment to the public telecommunications network;

(d) licensing, permit, registration or notification requirements, if any;

(e) general procedures relating to resolution of telecommunications disputes provided for in Article 13.21 (Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes); and

(f) any measures of the telecommunications regulatory body if the government delegates to other bodies the responsibility for preparing, amending and adopting standards-related measures affecting access and use.

Article 13.23: Flexibility in the Choice of Technology

1. No Party shall prevent suppliers of public telecommunications services from choosing the technologies they wish to use to supply their services, subject to requirements necessary to satisfy legitimate public policy interests, provided that any measure restricting that choice is not prepared, adopted or applied in a manner that creates unnecessary obstacles to trade. For greater certainty, a Party adopting those measures shall do so consistent with Article 13.22 (Transparency).

2. When a Party finances the development of advanced networks[25], it may make its financing conditional on the use of technologies that meet its specific public policy interests.

Article 13.24: Relation to Other Chapters

In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this Agreement, this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 13.25: Relation to International Organisations

The Parties recognise the importance of international standards for global compatibility and interoperability of telecommunications networks and services and undertake to promote those standards through the work of relevant international organisations.

Article 13.26: Committee on Telecommunications

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Telecommunications (Committee) composed of government representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall:

(a) review and monitor the implementation and operation of this Chapter, with a view to ensuring the effective implementation of the Chapter by enabling responsiveness to technological and regulatory developments in telecommunications to ensure the continuing relevance of this Chapter to Parties, service suppliers and end users;

(b) discuss any issues related to this Chapter and any other issues relevant to the telecommunications sector as may be decided by the Parties;

(c) report to the Commission on the findings and the outcomes of discussions of the Committee; and

(d) carry out other functions delegated to it by the Commission.

3. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as the Parties may decide.

4. The Parties may decide to invite representatives of relevant entities other than the Parties, including representatives of private sector entities, having the necessary expertise relevant to the issues to be discussed, to attend meetings of the Committee.

Annex 13-A — Rural Telephone Suppliers — United States

The United States may exempt rural local exchange carriers and rural telephone companies, as defined, respectively, in sections 251(f)(2) and 3(37) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, (47 U.S.C. § 251(f)(2) and § 153(44)), from the obligations contained in Article 13.5.4 (Number Portability), Article 13.9 (Resale), Article 13.10 (Unbundling of Network Elements by Major Suppliers), Article 13.11 (Interconnection with Major Suppliers), and Article 13.13 (Co-location by Major Suppliers).

Annex 13-B — Rural Telephone Suppliers — Peru

1. With respect to Peru:

(a) a rural operator shall not be considered a major supplier;

(b) Article 13.5.4 (Number Portability) shall not apply to rural operators; and

(c) Article 13.12 (Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuits Services by Major Suppliers), Article 13.13 (Co-Location by Major Suppliers) and Article 13.14 (Access to Poles, Ducts, Conduits, and Rights-of-way Owned or Controlled by Major Suppliers) shall not apply to the facilities deployed by major suppliers in rural areas.

2. For the purposes of this Annex, for Peru:

(a) rural area means a population centre:

(i) that is not included within urban areas, with a population of less than 3,000 inhabitants, a low population density, and a lack of basic services; or

(ii) with a teledensity rate of less than two fixed lines per 100 inhabitants; and

(b) rural operator means a rural telephone company that has at least 80 per cent of its total fixed subscriber lines in operation in rural areas.

[1] For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to authorise an enterprise of another Party to establish, construct, acquire, lease, operate or supply public telecommunications services, unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement.

[2] Consistent with paragraph 2(b), the United States, based on its evaluation of the state of competition of the U.S. commercial mobile market, has not applied major supplier-related measures pursuant to Articles 13.7 (Treatment by Major Suppliers of Public Telecommunication Services), 13.9.2 (Resale), 13.11 (Interconnection with Major Suppliers), 13.13 (Co-Location by Major Suppliers), or 13.14 (Access to Poles, Ducts, Conduits and Rights-of-Way Owned or Controlled by Major Suppliers) to the commercial mobile market.

[3] For greater certainty, this Article does not prohibit any Party from requiring an enterprise to obtain a licence to supply any public telecommunications service within its territory.

[4] In Viet Nam, networks authorised to establish for the purpose of carrying out, on a non-commercial basis, voice and data telecommunications between members of a closed user group can only directly interconnect with each other where approved in writing by the telecommunications regulatory body. Viet Nam shall ensure that upon request an applicant receives the reasons for the denial of an authorisation. Viet Nam shall review this requirement to obtain written approval within two years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

[5] For greater certainty, the term “interconnection”, as used in this Chapter, does not include access to unbundled network elements.

[6] With respect to certain Parties, this paragraph shall apply as follows:

(a) for Brunei Darussalam, this paragraph shall not apply until such time as it determines, pursuant to periodic review, that it is economically feasible to implement number portability in Brunei Darussalam;

(b) for Malaysia, this paragraph shall apply only with respect to commercial mobile services until such time as it determines that it is economically feasible to apply number portability to fixed services; and

(c) for Viet Nam, this paragraph shall apply to fixed services at such time as it determines that it is technically and economically feasible. Within four years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam, it shall conduct a review for it to determine the economic feasibility of applying number portability to fixed services. With respect to commercial mobile services, this paragraph shall apply to Viet Nam no later than 2020.

[7] For Viet Nam, this paragraph shall not apply with respect to blocks of numbers that have been allocated prior to entry into force of this Agreement.

[8] For greater certainty, no Party shall, solely on the basis of any obligations owed to it by the first Party under a most-favoured-nation provision, or under a telecommunications-specific non-discrimination provision, in any existing international trade agreement, seek or obtain for its suppliers the access to regulated rates or conditions for wholesale international mobile roaming services that is provided under this Article.

[9] For greater certainty, access under paragraph 4(a) to the rates or conditions regulated by the first Party shall be available to a supplier of the second Party only if such regulated rates or conditions are reasonably comparable to those reciprocally regulated under the arrangement referred to in subparagraph (a). The telecommunications regulatory body of the first Party shall, in the case of disagreement, determine whether the rates or conditions are reasonably comparable.

[10] For the purposes of this subparagraph, rates or conditions that are reasonably comparable means rates or conditions agreed to be such by the relevant suppliers or, in the case of disagreement, determined to be such by the telecommunications regulatory body of the first Party.

[11] For greater certainty, such additional requirements may include, for example, that the rates provided to the supplier of the second Party reflect the reasonable cost of supplying international mobile roaming services by a supplier of the first Party to a supplier of the second Party, as determined through the methodology of the first Party.

[12] Brunei Darussalam may require that licensees who purchase public telecommunications services on a wholesale basis only resell their services to an end-user.

[13] For the purposes of this Article, each Party may determine reasonable rates through any methodology it considers appropriate.

[14] Where provided in its laws or regulations, a Party may prohibit a reseller that obtains, at wholesale rates, a public telecommunications service available at retail to only a limited category of subscribers from offering the service to a different category of subscribers.

[15] Chile may comply with this obligation by maintaining appropriate measures for the purpose of preventing a major supplier in its territory from denying access to poles, ducts, conduits and rights-of-way, owned or controlled by the major supplier.

[16] For Chile, this provision shall apply when its telecommunications regulatory body obtains the authority to implement this provision. Nonetheless, Chile shall ensure reasonable and non-discriminatory access to international submarine cable systems including landing stations in its territory.

[17] For Viet Nam, co-location for international submarine landing stations owned or controlled by the major supplier in the territory of Viet Nam excludes physical co-location.

[18] This paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit a government entity of a Party other than the telecommunications regulatory body from owning equity in a supplier of public telecommunications services.

[19] Viet Nam’s telecommunications regulatory body assumes the role of representing the government as owner of certain telecommunications suppliers. In this context, Viet Nam shall comply with this provision by ensuring that any regulatory actions with respect to those suppliers do not materially disadvantage any competitor.

[20] For Peru, the commitment to make publicly available assigned bands shall apply only to bands used to provide access to end-users.

[21] For the United States, subparagraph 1(b) applies only to the national regulatory body.

[22] With respect to Peru, enterprises may not petition for reconsideration of rulings of general application, as defined in Article 26.1 (Definitions), unless provided for under its laws and regulations. For Australia, subparagraph 1(d) does not apply.

[23] For greater certainty, seeking input does not include internal governmental deliberations.

[24] For greater certainty, a Party may consolidate its responses to the comments received from interested persons. Viet Nam may comply with this obligation by responding to any questions regarding its decisions upon request.

[25] For greater certainty, “advanced networks” includes broadband networks.


*************** Chapter 14 ***************

--- Electronic Commerce ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/87766c98a068)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs

TPP will help preserve the open Internet and prevent its breakup into multiple, balkanized networks in which data flows are more expensive and more frequently blocked. The Electronic Commerce chapter will ensure the free flow of data (subject to public-interest regulation, for example to prevent spam, protect privacy, and fight cyber-crime); prevent the spread of ‘forced localization’ of technologies and servers; and help to more effectively guarantee the security and privacy of internet users. All this will help to unlock the promise of digital trade through rules that keep the Internet free and open, set digital trade rules-of-the-road, and provide the incentives and a stable framework that can nurture a healthy environment for companies and individuals as they create and use content.

Overview

Cross-Border Data and Information Flows

TPP’s Electronic Commerce chapter includes commitments ensuring that companies and consumers can access and move data freely (subject to safeguards, such as for privacy), which will help ensure free flow of the global information and data that drive the Internet and the digital economy. These commitments, along with others on market access and national treatment, combine to help prevent unreasonable restriction, such as the arbitrary blocking of websites.

Location of Computing Facilities

The chapter includes guarantees that companies will not have to build expensive and unnecessarily redundant data centers in every market they seek to serve. The economies of scale of the digital economy, where capitaland energy-intensive data centers serve multiple countries, depend on this flexibility.

Customs Duties and Other Discriminatory Measures

The chapter prohibits the imposition of customs duties on digital products, to ensure that products distributed electronically, such as software, music, video, e-books, and games are not disadvantaged. A companion provision prevents TPP countries from favoring national producers or suppliers of such products through measures such as discriminatory taxation or outright blocking or other forms of content discrimination.

Consumer Protection and Privacy

To protect consumers, the chapter includes commitments by TPP Parties to adopt and maintain consumer protection laws related to fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities online. It also includes commitments ensuring that privacy and other consumer protections can be enforced in TPP markets. Governments have different ways of implementing privacy protections, and TPP recognizes that diversity and promotes interoperability between diverse legal regimes. The chapter also includes provisions requiring Parties to have measures to stop unsolicited commercial electronic messages (spam).

Facilitating Electronic Transactions and Trading

To facilitate digital trade, the chapter includes provisions encouraging TPP countries to promote paperless trading between businesses and the government, such as customs forms being put in electronic format; as well as providing for electronic authentication and signatures for commercial transactions.

Software

The chapter prohibits requirements that force suppliers to share valuable software source code with foreign governments or commercial rivals when entering a TPP market.

Cooperation

The chapter ensures close cooperation among TPP Parties to help businesses, especially small- and medium-sized enterprises, overcome obstacles and take advantage of electronic commerce. It also encourages cooperation on policies regarding personal information protection, online consumer protection, cybersecurity threats and cybersecurity capacity, especially given the rise of cyber-attacks and the global diffusion of malware.

New Features

As the Internet plays an increasingly vital role in global commerce, TPP will establish a framework of rules for digital trade in the Asia-Pacific that will benefit both businesses and consumers, and support U.S. economic growth, employment, and innovation. In addition to barring customs duties on digital products and building a consensus on other important commitments related to digital trade, the TPP’s Electronic Commerce chapter includes significant new elements that reflect new technological developments and address concerns regarding electronic commerce that have emerged over the past several years. These include:

First-ever commitments addressing the twin concerns over requirements that data be stored locally and prohibitions on the flow of data or information across borders. Together, these are among the most serious threats to an open Internet. These commitments will help guarantee that key inputs to digital trade are not arbitrarily impeded by governments, and reduce the threat of “balkanization” of the Internet.Ensuring that consumers have access to an open Internet, while requiring online consumer protection laws and ensuring that privacy and other consumer protections can be enforced.Encouraging cooperation of TPP countries on consumer protection, including privacy and cybersecurity.First-ever commitments underscoring the need to maintain consumer protection, for measures to stop unsolicited commercial electronic messages, and to ensure that privacy protections can be enforced in order to build consumer confidence and trust in the use of the Internet.Barring forced sharing of software code with governments or commercial rivals when entering a TPP market.Comprehensive commitments on cooperation related to digital trade, particularly to help small- and medium-sized enterprises take advantage of digital trade.First-ever commitments in an FTA on cooperation on cybersecurity threats and cybersecurity capacity, a significant problem, on which TPP countries will benefit from working collectively.

Impact

In the past six years, the world’s Internet-using population has nearly doubled from just over 1.5 billion to 3 billion, with the fastest rates of growth in developing regions like Southeast Asia. The TPP region is now home to close to 600 million Internet users, or almost one in every five global internet users. Transfers of data are rising even more rapidly: an estimated 80 terabytes of data per minute (equivalent to eight times the print content of the Library of Congress) now enters and leaves the United States, and this number grows rapidly each year as ever-faster broadband networks proliferate globally, the global fiber-optic cable network expands, and computer technologies improve.

Americans benefit from this in countless ways. An open Internet makes us more able to access ideas, products, and entertainment — whether one of the billions of “apps” downloaded onto a smartphone, one of the billions of songs, movies, games or books downloaded or streamed onto a digital device, or one of the ubiquitous and now indispensable services digital consumers and businesses around the globe use every day. America’s leadership position in the areas of IT research, the Internet industry, and entertainment makes an open Internet a vastly important asset as we export ideas, digital products, and services to the world. The United States is home to the world’s most innovative companies in the digital environment U.S. digitally-enabled service exports alone were nearly $400 billion in 2011, up from $273 billion in 2007, with small businesses in particular finding the Internet a uniquely powerful way to find customers and sell products worldwide. Over time, the Internet will help Americans take maximum advantage of our economy’s strengths in creativity and technology, enable tens of thousands of small businesses to participate in trade; and facilitate the emergence of non-traditional exporters in fields from health care to the arts and research labs.

However, the Internet is still new and there is a risk that countries could seek to regulate the digital environment in a way that jeopardizes a free and open internet. This would significantly undermine U.S. interests and innovation across the Asia-Pacific region, and would also do incalculable harm to future global growth and technological progress. That is why it is so important to ensure that these technologies remain open to new innovations, which TPP does by addressing, among other issues:

Barriers to cross-border data flows

Such data flows are the building blocks for all digital trade, and barriers to them are among the most serious impediments to the future of digital trade. Impediments to such flows affect not only technology companies, but almost every sector of the economy from manufacturing to farming and small businesses — all of which now depend on digital technology to provide the innovation and efficiency that drive economic growth.

Requirements that companies must store data locally

Such policies, which have been implemented in China and are being proposed by many other governments, undermine the architecture of the Internet, preventing the use of all “cloud” based services — from business software, to online music, e-mail, and travel services. They also affect the ability of companies, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises, to use the Internet as a global platform for delivery of goods and services. This is because small and medium-sized enterprises, which need information from customers in all of their markets, are generally unable to afford to build data centers in every market they serve. Where data localization requirements are instituted, commitments to provide access to specific services on a cross-border basis can become all but meaningless. In addition, even if a company wants to invest in a foreign market, it may still want to use its data processing facilities established in the United States or elsewhere.

TPP’s Electronic Commerce chapter, joining some of the world’s most sophisticated Internet economies with rapidly growing developing nations across four continents, will answer these concerns as the most ambitious trade policy ever designed for the Internet and electronic commerce. Resting both on America’s long-held commitment to the free flow of ideas and on the value of the future digital economy to American growth, prosperity, and employment, it will address the emerging challenges to the integrity and efficiency of the global Internet, ensuring that it remains an open space for commerce, that consumers and Internet users have confidence in regulation for privacy and security, and that electronic commerce achieves its vast future potential.

Article 14.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

computing facilities means computer servers and storage devices for processing or storing information for commercial use;

covered person[1] means:

(a) a covered investment as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions);

(b) an investor of a Party as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions),but does not include an investor in a financial institution; or

(c) a service supplier of a Party as defined in Article 10.1 (Definitions),

but does not include a “financial institution” or a “cross-border financial service supplier of a Party” as defined in Article 11.1 (Definitions);

digital product means a computer programme, text, video, image, sound recording or other product that is digitally encoded, produced for commercial sale or distribution, and that can be transmitted electronically;[2], [3]

electronic authentication means the process or act of verifying the identity of a party to an electronic communication or transaction and ensuring the integrity of an electronic communication;

electronic transmission or transmitted electronically means a transmission made using any electromagnetic means, including by photonic means;

personal information means any information, including data, about an identified or identifiable natural person;

trade administration documents means forms issued or controlled by a Party that must be completed by or for an importer or exporter in connection with the import or export of goods; and

unsolicited commercial electronic message means an electronic message which is sent for commercial or marketing purposes to an electronic address, without the consent of the recipient or despite the explicit rejection of the recipient, through an Internet access service supplier or, to the extent provided for under the laws and regulations of each Party, other telecommunications service.

Article 14.2: Scope and General Provisions

1. The Parties recognise the economic growth and opportunities provided by electronic commerce and the importance of frameworks that promote consumer confidence in electronic commerce and of avoiding unnecessary barriers to its use and development.

2. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect trade by electronic means.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) government procurement; or

(b) information held or processed by or on behalf of a Party, or measures related to such information, including measures related to its collection.

4. For greater certainty, measures affecting the supply of a service delivered or performed electronically are subject to the obligations contained in the relevant provisions of Chapter 9 (Investment), Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services) and Chapter 11 (Financial Services), including any exceptions or non-conforming measures set out in this Agreement that are applicable to those obligations.

5. For greater certainty, the obligations contained in Article 14.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products), Article 14.11 (Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means), Article 14.13 (Location of Computing Facilities) and Article 14.17 (Source Code) are:

(a) subject to the relevant provisions, exceptions and non-conforming measures of Chapter 9 (Investment), Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services) and Chapter 11 (Financial Services); and

(b) to be read in conjunction with any other relevant provisions in this Agreement.

5. The obligations contained in Article 14.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products), Article 14.11 (Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means) and Article 14.13 (Location of Computing Facilities) shall not apply to the non-conforming aspects of measures adopted or maintained in accordance with Article 9.11 (Non-Conforming Measures), Article 10.7 (Non-Conforming Measures) or Article 11.10 (Non-Conforming Measures).

Article 14.3: Customs Duties

1. No Party shall impose customs duties on electronic transmissions, including content transmitted electronically, between a person of one Party and a person of another Party.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 shall not preclude a Party from imposing internal taxes, fees or other charges on content transmitted electronically, provided that such taxes, fees or charges are imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.

Article 14.4: Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products

1. No Party shall accord less favourable treatment to digital products created, produced, published, contracted for, commissioned or first made available on commercial terms in the territory of another Party, or to digital products of which the author, performer, producer, developer or owner is a person of another Party, than it accords to other like digital products.[4]

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the extent of any inconsistency with the rights and obligations in Chapter 18 (Intellectual Property).

3. The Parties understand that this Article does not apply to subsidies or grants provided by a Party including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance.

4. This Article shall not apply to broadcasting.

Article 14.5: Domestic Electronic Transactions Framework

1. Each Party shall maintain a legal framework governing electronic transactions consistent with the principles of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce 1996 or the United Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts, done at New York November 23, 2005.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) avoid any unnecessary regulatory burden on electronic transactions; and

(b) facilitate input by interested persons in the development of its legal framework for electronic transactions.

Article 14.6: Electronic Authentication and Electronic Signatures

1. Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its law, a Party shall not deny the legal validity of a signature solely on the basis that the signature is in electronic form.

2. No Party shall adopt or maintain measures for electronic authentication that would:

(a) prohibit parties to an electronic transaction from mutually determining the appropriate authentication methods for that transaction; or

(b) prevent parties to an electronic transaction from having the opportunity to establish before judicial or administrative authorities that their transaction complies with any legal requirements with respect to authentication.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that, for a particular category of transactions, the method of authentication meets certain performance standards or is certified by an authority accredited in accordance with its law.

4. The Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic authentication.

Article 14.7: Online Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and maintaining transparent and effective measures to protect consumers from fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities as referred to in Article 16.7.2 (Consumer Protection) when they engage in electronic commerce.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain consumer protection laws to proscribe fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities that cause harm or potential harm to consumers engaged in online commercial activities.

3. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their respective national consumer protection agencies or other relevant bodies on activities related to cross-border electronic commerce in order to enhance consumer welfare. To this end, the Parties affirm that the cooperation sought under Article 16.7.5 and Article 16.7.6 (Consumer Protection) includes cooperation with respect to online commercial activities.

Article 14.8: Personal Information Protection[5]

1. The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting the personal information of users of electronic commerce and the contribution that this makes to enhancing consumer confidence in electronic commerce.

2. To this end, each Party shall adopt or maintain a legal framework that provides for the protection of the personal information of the users of electronic commerce. In the development of its legal framework for the protection of personal information, each Party should take into account principles and guidelines of relevant international bodies.[6]

3. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt non-discriminatory practices in protecting users of electronic commerce from personal information protection violations occurring within its jurisdiction.

4. Each Party should publish information on the personal information protections it provides to users of electronic commerce, including how:

(a) individuals can pursue remedies; and

(b) business can comply with any legal requirements.

5. Recognising that the Parties may take different legal approaches to protecting personal information, each Party should encourage the development of mechanisms to promote compatibility between these different regimes. These mechanisms may include the recognition of regulatory outcomes, whether accorded autonomously or by mutual arrangement, or broader international frameworks. To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to exchange information on any such mechanisms applied in their jurisdictions and explore ways to extend these or other suitable arrangements to promote compatibility between them.

Article 14.9: Paperless Trading

Each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) make trade administration documents available to the public in electronic form; and

(b) accept trade administration documents submitted electronically as the legal equivalent of the paper version of those documents.

Article 14.10: Principles on Access to and Use of the Internet for Electronic Commerce

Subject to applicable policies, laws and regulations, the Parties recognise the benefits of consumers in their territories having the ability to:

(a) access and use services and applications of a consumer’s choice available on the Internet, subject to reasonable network management[7];

(b) connect the end-user devices of a consumer’s choice to the Internet, provided that such devices do not harm the network; and

(c) access information on the network management practices of a consumer’s Internet access service supplier.

Article 14.11: Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means

1. The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements concerning the transfer of information by electronic means.

2. Each Party shall allow the cross-border transfer of information by electronic means, including personal information, when this activity is for the conduct of the business of a covered person.

3. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures inconsistent with paragraph 2 to achieve a legitimate public policy objective, provided that the measure:

(a) is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade; and

(b) does not impose restrictions on transfers of information greater than are required to achieve the objective.

Article 14.12: Internet Interconnection Charge Sharing

The Parties recognise that a supplier seeking international Internet connection should be able to negotiate with suppliers of another Party on a commercial basis. These negotiations may include negotiations regarding compensation for the establishment, operation and maintenance of facilities of the respective suppliers.

Article 14.13: Location of Computing Facilities

1. The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements regarding the use of computing facilities, including requirements that seek to ensure the security and confidentiality of communications.

2. No Party shall require a covered person to use or locate computing facilities in that Party’s territory as a condition for conducting business in that territory.

3. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures inconsistent with paragraph 2 to achieve a legitimate public policy objective, provided that the measure:

(a) is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade; and

(b) does not impose restrictions on the use or location of computing facilities greater than are required to achieve the objective.

Article 14.14: Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Messages[8]

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures regarding unsolicited commercial electronic messages that:

(a) require suppliers of unsolicited commercial electronic messages to facilitate the ability of recipients to prevent ongoing reception of those messages;

(b) require the consent, as specified according to the laws and regulations of each Party, of recipients to receive commercial electronic messages; or

(c) otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

2. Each Party shall provide recourse against suppliers of unsolicited commercial electronic messages that do not comply with the measures adopted or maintained pursuant to paragraph 1.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

Article 14.15: Cooperation

Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, the Parties shall endeavour to:

(a) work together to assist SMEs to overcome obstacles to its use;

(b) exchange information and share experiences on regulations, policies, enforcement and compliance regarding electronic commerce, including:

(i) personal information protection;

(ii) online consumer protection including means for consumer redress and building consumer confidence;

(iii) unsolicited commercial electronic messages;

(iv) security in electronic communications;

(v) authentication; and

(vi) e-government;

(c) exchange information and share views on consumer access to products and services offered online among the Parties;

(d) participate actively in regional and multilateral fora to promote the development of electronic commerce; and

(e) encourage development by the private sector of methods of self-regulation that foster electronic commerce, including codes of conduct, model contracts, guidelines and enforcement mechanisms.

Article 14.16: Cooperation on Cybersecurity Matters

The Parties recognise the importance of:

(a) building the capabilities of their national entities responsible for computer security incident response; and

(b) using existing collaboration mechanisms to cooperate to identify and mitigate malicious intrusions or dissemination of malicious code that affect the electronic networks of the Parties.

Article 14.17: Source Code

1. No Party shall require the transfer of, or access to, source code of software owned by a person of another Party, as a condition for the import, distribution, sale or use of such software, or of products containing such software, in its territory.

2. For the purposes of this Article, software subject to paragraph 1 is limited to mass-market software or products containing such software and does not include software used for critical infrastructure.

3. Nothing in this Article shall preclude:

(a) the inclusion or implementation of terms and conditions related to the provision of source code in commercially negotiated contracts; or

(b) a Party from requiring the modification of source code of software necessary for that software to comply with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with this Agreement.

4. This Article shall not be construed to affect requirements that relate to patent applications or granted patents, including any orders made by a judicial authority in relation to patent disputes, subject to safeguards against unauthorised disclosure under the law or practice of a Party.

Article 14.18: Dispute Settlement

1. With respect to existing measures, Malaysia shall not be subject to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) regarding its obligations under Article 14.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products) and Article 14.11 (Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means) for a period of two years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Malaysia.

2. With respect to existing measures, Viet Nam shall not be subject to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) regarding its obligations under Article 14.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products), Article 14.11 (Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means) and Article 14.13 (Location of Computing Facilities) for a period of two years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam.

[1] For Australia, a covered person does not include a credit reporting body.

[2] For greater certainty, digital product does not include a digitised representation of a financial instrument, including money.

[3] The definition of digital product should not be understood to reflect a Party’s view on whether trade in digital products through electronic transmission should be categorised as trade in services or trade in goods.

[4] For greater certainty, to the extent that a digital product of a non-Party is a “like digital product”, it will qualify as an “other like digital product” for the purposes of Article 14.4.1.

[5] Brunei Darussalam and Viet Nam are not required to apply this Article before the date on which that Party implements its legal framework that provides for the protection of personal data of the users of electronic commerce.

[6] For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the obligation in this paragraph by adopting or maintaining measures such as a comprehensive privacy, personal information or personal data protection laws, sector-specific laws covering privacy, or laws that provide for the enforcement of voluntary undertakings by enterprises relating to privacy.

[7] The Parties recognise that an Internet access service supplier that offers its subscribers certain content on an exclusive basis would not be acting contrary to this principle.

[8] Brunei Darussalam is not required to apply this Article before the date on which it implements its legal framework regarding unsolicited commercial electronic messages.


*************** Chapter 15 ***************

--- Government Procurement ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/ac9def5bba92)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs

TPP’s Government Procurement chapter will help create export opportunities for American producers of manufactured goods and services which support high-wage employment in the United States, ranging from information technology to transport machinery, medical technologies, professional services, and many other products. At the same time, it will support U.S. businesses and workers, including by maintaining current Buy America requirements and small business and other set asides.

Overview

Core Commitments and Definitions

The Government Procurement chapter includes core commitments on national treatment, which require that a TPP Party extend to bidders on covered government procurement contracts the same treatment it extends to its own firms; and on most-favored-nation treatment, which require a Party to provide U.S. and other TPP firms at least as good treatment as it extends to any other Party’s firms. These procurement provisions do not apply to loans and grants or other forms of assistance from a government. For example, this means federal loans and grants provided by the Department of Transportation and the Environmental Protection Agency to U.S. states and local entities, to which Congress has attached “Buy America” requirements, will not be covered by the chapter.

Provision of Complete and Timely Information

Timely and complete information is essential if American businesses are to compete successfully for foreign government procurement contracts. For all covered procurements, TPP Parties will publish information in a timely manner on the procuring entity, the specific procurement, the time frame for submission of bids, and a description of conditions for participation of suppliers.

Fair and Transparent Procurement Procedures

The chapter ensures that TPP governments allow sufficient time for suppliers to obtain the tender documentation and submit a bid. It also includes guarantees that tenders will be treated fairly and impartially, and that confidentiality of tenders will be maintained. In addition, it includes commitments that contracts will be awarded based solely on the evaluation criteria specified in the notices and tender documentation. To ensure fairness and due process, TPP rules allow an unsuccessful bidder to request an explanation of the contract award decision and require each TPP country to have an impartial administrative or judicial review authority to review a complaint, similar to what already is provided for in U.S. law.

Non-discriminatory and Flexible Specifications

For U.S. exporters to be able to compete on an even footing for a foreign government procurement opportunity, technical specifications must be fair and objective. The Government Procurement chapter ensures that technical specifications focus on performance and functional requirements rather than design or descriptive characteristics, are based on international standards where available, and do not create unnecessary barriers to trade. It also includes rules that allow the conditions for participating in a covered procurement to ensure that a supplier has the legal and financial capacities, and the commercial and technical abilities, to fulfill the requirements of that procurement. At the same time, the chapter allows for flexible and fair technical specifications and conditions for participation, and preserves wide latitude for U.S. procuring entities to set the requirements they consider appropriate.

Coverage

The commitments in the Government Procurement chapter apply only to procurement that each country has agreed to cover. Eight of the 11 TPP Parties have already agreed to ambitious coverage of their government procurement in past trade agreements with the United States. With those Parties, TPP’s Government Procurement chapter reflects or expands past commitments. For the remaining three countries, we are seeking comparable commitments, recognizing that each is opening its government procurement market for the first time in TPP.

Buy America and Other Exclusions

Every country, including the United States, has particular programs that TPP government procurement commitments will not cover. The United States in TPP continues to exclude from coverage the same elements of procurement that are excluded from our past agreements: Buy America requirements attached to federal funds for state and local mass transit and highway projects and water projects; small business and other set-asides; procurement of transportation services; human feeding programs; and sensitive elements of Department of Defense procurement, including defense systems, materials and textiles. In addition, we are making no commitments to cover state or local government procurement at this time

New Features

TPP marks the first government procurements commitments to the United States ever made by Vietnam, Malaysia, and Brunei, while also including additional commitments from other TPP partners beyond previous agreements. Moreover, to date, only four agreements in the world — the U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with Peru, Panama, Colombia and Korea — clarify, for greater certainty, that technical specifications for a tender, or conditions for participation in procurement, can be designed to promote both compliance with laws regarding international labor rights and protection of the environment. TPP extends that flexibility to procurement with ten other countries. In addition, it clarifies that those procurement specifications or conditions can also be designed to promote compliance with laws related to worker safety and workplace conditions.

Impact

Government contracting is a key export opportunity for U.S. goods producers and services suppliers. Covering goods and services where American products are the world’s standard — health equipment and supplies, information technology equipment and services, transportation machinery, infrastructure equipment, professional services, engineering, and others — government procurement purchases are estimated to represent up to 15 percent of a country’s gross domestic product.

Reaching these markets, however, can be exceptionally difficult. Many governments in the Asia-Pacific and elsewhere have formal policies that put foreign bidders at a disadvantage. They also have informal barriers such as a lack of transparency, predictability and fairness in tender procedures, as well as uncertain, variable rules, which can create further challenges. By contrast, the U.S. has a transparent procurement process, where procurement information and rules for participation, including for foreign bidders, are widely available. This means U.S. companies seeking to compete in foreign government procurement markets face several challenges. To address these, the Government Procurement chapter will help:

Create fair, transparent, predictable, and non-discriminatory rules to open foreign government procurement to U.S. exporters.Enable U.S. exporters to compete for procurement opportunities by ensuring that timely and accessible information is available on upcoming procurements; technical specifications and qualifications are fair and non-discriminatory; tender procedures are transparent, and adequate time is provided for foreign bidders to participate.Support U.S. businesses, including small and medium-sized enterprises, by maintaining Buy America requirements and our small business and other set-asides. In addition, we are avoiding any commitments covering U.S. state or local procurement at this time. Any future commitments could only be made if these state or local governments explicitly agree to such coverage.


*************** Chapter 16 ***************

--- Competition Policy ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/cb2688b4a8a1)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

The Competition Policy chapter will help ensure that Asia-Pacific markets have a foundation in principles of fair competition, consumer protection, and transparency through rules that require TPP partners to maintain legal regimes that prohibit anticompetitive business conduct, as well as fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities that harm consumers. This will help to guarantee that markets in TPP members are genuinely open to made-in-America manufactured goods, farm products, and services, as it simultaneously promotes consumer protection in all TPP countries.

Overview

Effective Competition Laws

Through the Competition Policy chapter, TPP members agree to adopt or maintain national competition laws that proscribe anticompetitive business conduct and work to apply these laws to all commercial activities in their territories. To ensure that such laws are effectively implemented, TPP Parties will establish or maintain authorities responsible for the enforcement of national competition laws. This chapter will not require any U.S. laws and regulations to be changed, as we already meet these commitments.

Consumer Protection

TPP members agree to adopt or — as in the case of the United States — maintain laws that proscribe fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities that cause harm or potential harm to consumers. Parties also agree to cooperate, as appropriate, on matters of mutual interest related to competition activities, including in the enforcement of consumer protection laws.

Procedural Fairness

As TPP countries strengthen their competition policy laws and their enforcement, the Competition Policy chapter includes a range of obligations related to procedural fairness, including rules that ensure a person subject to an enforcement action has a reasonable opportunity to be represented by counsel, to provide evidence in its defense, and that the enforcement authority adopt a series of transparency procedures.

Private Rights of Action

TPP Parties agree to provide an independent right to seek redress for injury caused by a violation of a Party’s competition law or, to provide persons with a right to request that a Party’s competition authority initiate an investigation and to seek redress after the finding of a violation of competition law.

Cooperation and Transparency

TPP Parties agree to cooperate in the area of competition policy and competition law enforcement, including through notification, consultation and exchange of information. They also agree to ensure that final decisions finding a violation of competition law are made publicly available, while ensuring that business confidential information is protected.

Dispute Settlement

Consistent with previous U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs), dispute settlement will not apply to competition policy provisions. However, the TPP Parties do agree to enter into consultations on issues related to the chapter, upon the request of another Party

New Features

Establishing a regional standard on competition policy will benefit U.S. companies and consumers, providing for fair competition and promoting consumer protection. New features in TPP’s Competition Policy chapter include establishing detailed rules on procedural fairness in competition law enforcement, consistent with U.S. law and practice. Similarly, it provides a regional standard requiring Parties to adopt or maintain laws proscribing fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities

Impact

Competition policy systems vary widely in the Asia Pacific. Some countries have advanced systems of anti-trust law and guarantee consumer rights, but take different approaches to achieve these ends. Some have no competition policy laws at all; others use opaque systems in which case filings can appear to be arbitrary or designed to reduce the market share of U.S. or other foreign businesses. This issue appears to be a rapidly growing challenge to American exporters, especially, but not only, in sectors where U.S. businesses and workers are perceived to be world technological leaders.

TPP’s Competition Policy chapter encourages effective and transparent competition policy systems that encourage market-based competition and protect consumers against monopoly tactics. These principles are meant to be the foundation of transparent laws ensuring fair competition in the Asia-Pacific region, and ensuring that regulatory actions rest on objective and transparent criteria and are taken in a manner that does not discriminate against foreign or specifically U.S. businesses. As we create this larger environment of fair competition and consumer protection, the United States will retain full authority over the administration of American laws applied to competition within the United States

Article 16.1: Competition Law and Authorities and Anticompetitive Business Conduct[1]

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain national competition laws that proscribe anticompetitive business conduct, with the objective of promoting economic efficiency and consumer welfare, and shall take appropriate action with respect to that conduct. These laws should take into account the APEC Principles to Enhance Competition and Regulatory Reform done at Auckland, September 13, 1999.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to apply its national competition laws to all commercial activities in its territory.[2] However, each Party may provide for certain exemptions from the application of its national competition laws provided that those exemptions are transparent and are based on public policy grounds or public interest grounds.

3. Each Party shall maintain an authority or authorities responsible for the enforcement of its national competition laws (national competition authorities). Each Party shall provide that it is the enforcement policy of that authority or authorities to act in accordance with the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and not to discriminate on the basis of nationality.

Article 16.2: Procedural Fairness in Competition Law Enforcement[3]

1. Each Party shall ensure that before it imposes a sanction or remedy against a person for violating its national competition laws, it affords that person:

(a) information about the national competition authority’s competition concerns;

(b) a reasonable opportunity to be represented by counsel; and

(c) a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence in its defence, except that a Party may provide for the person to be heard and present evidence within a reasonable time after it imposes an interim sanction or remedy.

In particular, each Party shall afford that person a reasonable opportunity to present evidence or testimony in its defence, including: if applicable, to offer the analysis of a properly qualified expert, to cross-examine any testifying witness; and to review and rebut the evidence introduced in the enforcement proceeding[4].

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain written procedures pursuant to which its national competition law investigations are conducted. If these investigations are not subject to definitive deadlines, each Party’s national competition authorities shall endeavour to conduct their investigations within a reasonable time frame.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain rules of procedure and evidence that apply to enforcement proceedings concerning alleged violations of its national competition laws and the determination of sanctions and remedies thereunder. These rules shall include procedures for introducing evidence, including expert evidence if applicable, and shall apply equally to all parties to a proceeding.

4. Each Party shall provide a person that is subject to the imposition of a sanction or remedy for violation of its national competition laws with the opportunity to seek review of the sanction or remedy, including review of alleged substantive or procedural errors, in a court or other independent tribunal established under that Party’s laws.

5. Each Party shall authorise its national competition authorities to resolve alleged violations voluntarily by consent of the authority and the person subject to the enforcement action. A Party may provide for such voluntary resolution to be subject to judicial or independent tribunal approval or a public comment period before becoming final.

6. If a Party’s national competition authority issues a public notice that reveals the existence of a pending or ongoing investigation, that authority shall avoid implying in that notice that the person referred to in that notice has engaged in the alleged conduct or violated the Party’s national competition laws.

7. If a Party’s national competition authority alleges a violation of its national competition laws, that authority shall be responsible for establishing the legal and factual basis for the alleged violation in an enforcement proceeding.[5]

8. Each Party shall provide for the protection of business confidential information, and other information treated as confidential under its law, obtained by its national competition authorities during the investigative process. If a Party’s national competition authority uses or intends to use that information in an enforcement proceeding, the Party shall, if it is permissible under its law and as appropriate, provide a procedure to allow the person under investigation timely access to information that is necessary to prepare an adequate defence to the national competition authority’s allegations.

9. Each Party shall ensure that its national competition authorities afford a person under investigation for possible violation of the national competition laws of that Party reasonable opportunity to consult with those competition authorities with respect to significant legal, factual or procedural issues that arise during the investigation.

Article 16.3: Private Rights of Action[6]

1. For the purposes of this Article, “private right of action” means the right of a person to seek redress, including injunctive, monetary or other remedies, from a court or other independent tribunal for injury to that person’s business or property caused by a violation of national competition laws, either independently or following a finding of violation by a national competition authority.

2. Recognising that a private right of action is an important supplement to the public enforcement of national competition laws, each Party should adopt or maintain laws or other measures that provide an independent private right of action.

3. If a Party does not adopt or maintain laws or other measures that provide an independent private right of action, the Party shall adopt or maintain laws or other measures that provide a right that allows a person:

(a) to request that the national competition authority initiate an investigation into an alleged violation of national competition laws; and

(b) to seek redress from a court or other independent tribunal following a finding of violation by the national competition authority.

4. Each Party shall ensure that a right provided pursuant to paragraph 2 or 3 is available to persons of another Party on terms that are no less favourable than those available to its own persons.

5. A Party may establish reasonable criteria for the exercise of any rights it creates or maintains in accordance with this Article.

Article 16.4: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation and coordination between their respective national competition authorities to foster effective competition law enforcement in the free trade area. Accordingly, each Party shall:

(a) cooperate in the area of competition policy by exchanging information on the development of competition policy; and

(b) cooperate, as appropriate, on issues of competition law enforcement, including through notification, consultation and the exchange of information.

2. A Party’s national competition authorities may consider entering into a cooperation arrangement or agreement with the competition authorities of another Party that sets out mutually agreed terms of cooperation.

3. The Parties agree to cooperate in a manner compatible with their respective laws, regulations and important interests, and within their reasonably available resources.

Article 16.5: Technical Cooperation

Recognising that the Parties can benefit by sharing their diverse experience in developing, applying and enforcing competition law and in developing and implementing competition policies, the Parties shall consider undertaking mutually agreed technical cooperation activities, subject to available resources, including:

(a) providing advice or training on relevant issues, including through the exchange of officials;

(b) exchanging information and experiences on competition advocacy, including ways to promote a culture of competition; and

(c) assisting a Party as it implements a new national competition law.

Article 16.6: Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of consumer protection policy and enforcement to creating efficient and competitive markets and enhancing consumer welfare in the free trade area.

2. For the purposes of this Article, fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities refers to those fraudulent and deceptive commercial practices that cause actual harm to consumers, or that pose an imminent threat of such harm if not prevented, for example:

(a) a practice of making misrepresentations of material fact, including implied factual misrepresentations, that cause significant detriment to the economic interests of misled consumers;

(b) a practice of failing to deliver products or provide services to consumers after the consumers are charged; or

(c) a practice of charging or debiting consumers’ financial, telephone or other accounts without authorisation.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain consumer protection laws or other laws or regulations that proscribe fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities.[7]

4. The Parties recognise that fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities increasingly transcend national borders and that cooperation and coordination between the Parties is desirable to effectively address these activities.

5. Accordingly, the Parties shall promote, as appropriate, cooperation and coordination on matters of mutual interest related to fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities, including in the enforcement of their consumer protection laws.

6. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate and coordinate on the matters set out in this Article through the relevant national public bodies or officials responsible for consumer protection policy, laws or enforcement, as determined by each Party and compatible with their respective laws, regulations and important interests and within their reasonably available resources.

Article 16.7: Transparency

1. The Parties recognise the value of making their competition enforcement policies as transparent as possible.

2. Recognising the value of the APEC Competition Law and Policy Database in enhancing the transparency of national competition laws, policies and enforcement activities, each Party shall endeavour to maintain and update its information on that database.

3. On request of another Party, a Party shall make available to the requesting Party public information concerning:

(a) its competition law enforcement policies and practices; and

(b) exemptions and immunities to its national competition laws, provided that the request specifies the particular good or service and market of concern and includes information explaining how the exemption or immunity may hinder trade or investment between the Parties.

4. Each Party shall ensure that a final decision finding a violation of its national competition laws is made in writing and sets out, in non-criminal matters, findings of fact and the reasoning, including legal and, if applicable, economic analysis, on which the decision is based.

5. Each Party shall further ensure that a final decision referred to in paragraph 4 and any order implementing that decision are published, or if publication is not practicable, are otherwise made available to the public in a manner that enables interested persons and other Parties to become acquainted with them. Each Party shall ensure that the version of the decision or order that is made available to the public does not include confidential information that is protected from public disclosure by its law.

Article 16.8: Consultations

In order to foster understanding between the Parties, or to address specific matters that arise under this Chapter, on request of another Party, a Party shall enter into consultations with the requesting Party. In its request, the requesting Party shall indicate, if relevant, how the matter affects trade or investment between the Parties. The Party addressed shall accord full and sympathetic consideration to the concerns of the requesting Party.

Article 16.9: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter BBB (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.

Annex 16-A:

Application of Article 16.2, Article 16.3 and Article 16.4 to Brunei Darussalam

1. If as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Brunei Darussalam does not have a national competition law which is in force and has not established a national competition authority, Article 16.2 (Procedural Fairness in Competition Law Enforcement), Article 16.3 (Private Rights of Action) and Article 16.4 (Cooperation) shall not apply to Brunei Darussalam for a period of no longer than 10 years after that date.

2. If Brunei Darussalam establishes a national competition authority or authorities before the end of the 10 year period, Article 16.2 (Procedural Fairness in Competition Law Enforcement), Article 16.3 (Private Rights of Action), and Article 16.4 (Cooperation) shall apply to Brunei Darussalam from the date of establishment.

3. During the 10 year period, Brunei Darussalam shall take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that it is in compliance with Article 16.2 (Procedural Fairness in Competition Law Enforcement), Article 16.3 (Private Rights of Action) and Article 16.4 (Cooperation) at the end of the 10-year period and shall endeavour to comply with these obligations before the end of such period. Upon request of a Party, Brunei Darussalam shall inform the Parties of its progress since entry into force of the Agreement in developing and implementing an appropriate national competition law and establishing a national competition authority or authorities.

[1] This Article is subject to Annex 16-A (Application of Article 16.2, Article 16.3 and Article 16.4 to Brunei Darussalam).

[2] For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to preclude a Party from applying its competition laws to commercial activities outside its borders that have anticompetitive effects within its jurisdiction.

[3] This Article is subject to Annex 16-A (Application of Article 16.2, Article 16.3 and Article 16.4 to Brunei Darussalam).

[4] For the purposes of this Article, “enforcement proceedings” means judicial or administrative proceedings following an investigation into the alleged violation of the competition laws.

[5] Nothing in paragraph 7 shall prevent a Party from requiring that a person against whom such an allegation is made be responsible for establishing certain elements in defence of the allegation.

[6] This Article is subject to Annex 16-A (Application of Article 16.2, Article 16.3 and Article 16.4 to Brunei Darussalam).

[7] For greater certainty, the laws or regulations a Party adopts or maintains to proscribe these activities can be civil or criminal in nature.


*************** Chapter 17 ***************

--- State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/bfddb20cb3b3)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) chapter ensures that businesses, regardless of ownership, compete fairly through enforceable rules to ensure that foreign-owned SOEs compete on the basis of quality and price, not on the basis of discriminatory regulation, subsidies, or favoritism. This will ensure that their trade and investment activities do not place private American businesses and their workers at a disadvantage.

Overview

Coverage

TPP’s State-Owned Enterprise chapter provides broad coverage of SOEs that are principally engaged in commercial activity. At the same time, to avoid an outcome in which a government could easily evade its obligations by delegating its authority to an SOE, it includes rules requiring SOEs that operate under delegated authority to abide by the obligations of the TPP Agreement.

Commercial considerations and non-discriminatory treatment

The SOE chapter includes commitments by TPP Parties to ensure that their SOEs make commercial purchases and sales on the basis of commercial considerations, except when doing so would be inconsistent with any mandate under which an SOE is operating that would require it to provide public services. TPP governments also agree to ensure that their SOEs or designated monopolies do not discriminate against the enterprises, goods, and services of other Parties.

Immunity and impartial regulation

The SOE chapter includes obligations requiring TPP countries to provide their courts with jurisdiction over commercial activities of foreign SOEs so that a foreign SOE operating in a TPP country could not evade legal action regarding its commercial activities merely by claiming sovereign immunity. At the same time, it includes rules requiring Parties to ensure that administrative bodies regulating both SOEs and private companies do so in an impartial manner and do not use their regulatory authority to provide preferential treatment to their SOEs.

Non-commercial assistance

The SOE chapter ensures that, in providing any non-commercial assistance to SOEs, TPP Parties agree to not cause adverse effects to the interests of other TPP Parties. This includes a commitment from TPP Parties to not cause injury to another Party’s domestic industry by providing non-commercial assistance to a SOE that produces and sells goods in the territory of another Party.

Transparency

Having access to information about the SOEs of the TPP Parties and their activities is critical to ensuring the outcomes we hope to achieve through this chapter. Toward this end, the chapter requires TPP Parties to share a list of their SOEs with the other TPP countries and provide, upon request, additional information about the extent of government ownership or control and the non-commercial assistance they provide to SOEs.

Exceptions

The chapter establishes exceptions to the commitments on SOEs. For example, nothing in this chapter would prevent a Party from taking prudential measures or other measures to respond temporarily to an economic emergency.

Dispute settlement

SOE rules are fully enforceable, subject to State-to-State dispute settlement. Investor-state dispute settlement does not apply to the SOE rules.

Annexes

In addition to the exceptions that apply to all Parties, a set of country-specific Annexes define narrowly-tailored and country-specific exceptions to specific obligations as well as transition periods to provide certain countries additional time to meet the obligations of the chapter.

New Features

TPP goes beyond previous agreements in addressing the distortions SOEs can cause in the market. It is the first Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to seek to address comprehensively the commercial activities of SOEs that compete with private companies in international trade and investment. Most of the key elements in the SOE chapter are new, and we expect them to blaze the trail for work on this issue throughout the Asia-Pacific region. The chapter’s commitments build on principles in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and on previous U.S. FTAs, but go beyond them in important ways, including by applying subsidies rules to services exports of SOEs and to the operations of SOE manufacturers outside their home territory. The TPP Agreement also broadens and strengthens non-discrimination rules to apply to all commercial purchases and sales of SOEs wherever they operate in the TPP trade area.

Impact

SOEs have grown rapidly as actors in global trade, in cross-border investment, and in major American export markets over the past decade. Whereas in 2000, there was only one SOE in the Fortune Global 50 list of the largest companies in the world, now there are close to a dozen. Their international activity has raised new concerns about government influence, potential trade distortions, and unfair competition. In addition, some TPP countries that maintain many SOEs are already considering reforms to enhance the efficiency and productivity of their economies.

SOEs exist in all TPP countries, are used for different purposes, and are regulated and managed in widely varying ways. Some SOEs provide public services, but other times, extensive government participation in economies through SOEs can distort competition to the detriment of private American firms and their workers. This can occur through SOEs that receive advantages from governments, such as preferential financing, including through State-owned banks; provision of goods or services from the government or from other SOEs at preferential prices or free of charge; direct subsidies and debt forgiveness, or other preferences. These preferences can tilt the playing field in favor of SOEs and against U.S. workers and businesses. Even where enforcement against SOEs in foreign markets has been pursued for anti-competitive behavior or other unlawful behavior, commercial SOEs have avoided prosecution by claiming sovereign immunity.

Concerns about the role of SOEs have grown in recent years because SOEs that had previously operated almost exclusively within their own territories are increasingly engaged in international trade of goods and services or acting as investors in foreign markets. Their coverage in a specific TPP chapter is a new feature in U.S. trade agreements that will help us address emerging concerns, including financing and subsidization of SOEs involved in exporting, domestic competition for business and contracts; and regulatory policies which, by design or because of lack of transparency, create inherent advantages for SOEs favored by home governments. At the same time, TPP recognizes, defines, and ensures legitimate roles for SOEs in provision of public services.

Article 17.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

Arrangement means the Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits, developed within the framework of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), or a successor undertaking, whether developed within or outside of the OECD framework, that has been adopted by at least 12 original WTO Members that were Participants to the Arrangement as of January 1, 1979;

commercial activities means activities which an enterprise undertakes with an orientation toward profit-making[1] and which result in the production of a good or supply of a service that will be sold to a consumer in the relevant market in quantities and at prices determined by the enterprise;[2]

commercial considerations means price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation, and other terms and conditions of purchase or sale; or other factors that would normally be taken into account in the commercial decisions of a privately owned enterprise in the relevant business or industry;

designate means to establish, designate, or authorise a monopoly, or to expand the scope of a monopoly to cover an additional good or service;

designated monopoly means a privately owned monopoly that is designated after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and any government monopoly that a Party designates or has designated;

government monopoly means a monopoly that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party or by another government monopoly;

independent pension fund means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party that:

(a) is engaged exclusively in the following activities:

(i) administering or providing a plan for pension, retirement, social security, disability, death or employee benefits, or any combination thereof solely for the benefit of natural persons who are contributors to such a plan and their beneficiaries, or

(ii) investing the assets of these plans;

(b) has a fiduciary duty to the natural persons referenced in sub-paragraph (a); and

(c) is free from investment direction from the government of the Party;[3]

market means the geographical and commercial market for a good or service;

monopoly means an entity, including a consortium or government agency, that in any relevant market in the territory of a Party is designated as the sole provider or purchaser of a good or service, but does not include an entity that has been granted an exclusive intellectual property right solely by reason of the grant;

non-commercial assistance[4] means assistance to a state-owned enterprise by virtue of that state-owned enterprise’s government ownership or control, where:

(a) “assistance” means:

(i) direct transfers of funds or potential direct transfers of funds or liabilities, such as:

A. grants or debt forgiveness;

B. loans, loan guarantees or other types of financing on terms more favourable than those commercially available to that enterprise; or

C. equity capital inconsistent with the usual investment practice (including for the provision of risk capital) of private investors; or

(ii) goods or services other than general infrastructure on terms more favourable than those commercially available to that enterprise;

(b) “by virtue of that state-owned enterprise’s government ownership or control” means:[5]

(i) the Party or any of the Party’s state enterprises or state-owned enterprises explicitly limits access to the assistance to any of its state-owned enterprises;

(ii) the Party or any of the Party’s state enterprises or state-owned enterprises provides assistance which is predominately used by the Party’s state-owned enterprises;

(iii) the Party or any of the Party’s state enterprises or state-owned enterprises provides a disproportionately large amount of the assistance to the Party’s state-owned enterprises; or

(iv) the Party or any of the Party’s state enterprises or state-owned enterprises otherwise favours the Party’s state-owned enterprises through the use of its discretion in the provision of assistance;

a public service mandate means a government mandate pursuant to which a state-owned enterprise makes available a service, directly or indirectly, to the general public in its territory;[6]

sovereign wealth fund means an enterprise owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by a Party that:

(a) serves solely as a special purpose investment fund or arrangement[7] for asset management, investment, and related activities, using financial assets of a Party; and

(b) is a Member of the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds or endorses the Generally Accepted Principles and Practices (“Santiago Principles”) issued by the International Working Group of Sovereign Wealth Funds, October 2008, or such other principles and practices as may be agreed to by the Parties; and

includes any special purpose vehicles established solely for such activities described in sub-paragraph (a) wholly owned by the enterprise, or wholly owned by the Party but managed by the enterprise; and

state-owned enterprise means an enterprise:

(a) that is principally engaged in commercial activities; and

(b) in which a Party:

(i) directly owns more than 50 percent of the share capital;

(ii) controls, through ownership interests, the exercise of more than 50 percent of the voting rights; or

(iii) holds the power to appoint a majority of members of the board of directors or any other equivalent management body.

Article 17.2: Scope[8]

1. This Chapter shall apply with respect to the activities of state-owned enterprises and designated monopolies of a Party that affect trade or investment between Parties within the free trade area.[9]

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a central bank or monetary authority of a Party from performing regulatory or supervisory activities or conducting monetary and related credit policy and exchange rate policy.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a financial regulatory body of a Party, including a non-governmental body, such as a securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or association, from exercising regulatory or supervisory authority over financial services suppliers.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party, or one of its state enterprises or state-owned enterprises from undertaking activities for the purpose of the resolution of a failing or failed financial institution or any other failing or failed enterprise principally engaged in the supply of financial services.

5. This Chapter shall not apply with respect to a sovereign wealth fund of a Party[10], except:

(a) Article 17.6.1 and Article 17.6.3 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall apply with respect to a Party’s indirect provision of non-commercial assistance through a sovereign wealth fund; and

(b) Article 17.6.2 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall apply with respect to a sovereign wealth fund’s provision of non-commercial assistance;

6. This Chapter shall not apply with respect to:

(a) an independent pension fund of a Party; or

(b) an enterprise owned or controlled by an independent pension fund of a Party, except:

(i) Article 17.6.1 and Article 17.6.3 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall apply with respect to a Party’s direct or indirect provision of non-commercial assistance to an enterprise owned or controlled by an independent pension fund; and

(ii) Article 17.6.1 and Article 17.6.3 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall apply with respect to a Party’s indirect provision of non-commercial assistance through an enterprise owned or controlled by an independent pension fund.

7. This Chapter shall not apply to government procurement.

8. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a state-owned enterprise of a Party from providing goods or services exclusively to that Party for the purposes of carrying out that Party’s governmental functions.

9. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from:

(a) establishing or maintaining a state enterprise or a state-owned enterprise; or

(b) designating a monopoly.

10. Articles 17.4 (Non-discriminatory treatment and commercial considerations), Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance), and Article 17.10 ((Transparency) shall not apply to any service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority.[11]

11. Article 17.4.1(b), Article 17.4.1(c), Article 17.4.2(b), and Article 17.4.2(c) (Non-discriminatory treatment and commercial considerations) shall not apply to the extent that a Party’s state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly makes purchases and sales of goods or services pursuant to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that the Party maintains, continues, renews or amends in accordance with Article 9.11.1 (Non-Conforming Measures), Article 10.7.1 (Non-Conforming Measures) or Article 11.10.1 (Non-Conforming Measures), as set out in its Schedule to Annex I or in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III; or

(b) any non-conforming measure that the Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities in accordance with Article 9.11.2 (Non-Conforming Measures), Article 10.7.2 (Non-Conforming Measures) or Article 11.10.2 (Non-Conforming Measures), as set out in its Schedule to Annex II or in Section B of its Schedule to Annex III.

Article 17.3: Delegated Authority

Each Party shall ensure that when its state-owned enterprises, state enterprises, and designated monopolies exercise any regulatory, administrative, or other governmental authority that the Party has directed or delegated to such entities to carry out, such entities act in a manner that is not inconsistent with that Party’s obligations under this Agreement.[12]

Article 17.4: Non-discriminatory treatment and commercial considerations

1. Each Party shall ensure that each of its state-owned enterprises, when engaging in commercial activities:

(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale of a good or service, except to fulfil any terms of its public service mandate that are not inconsistent with subparagraph (c)(ii);

(b) in its purchase of a good or service,

(i) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of another Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(ii) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(c) in its sale of a good or service,

(i) accords to an enterprise of another Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(ii) accords to an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party.[13]

2. Each Party shall ensure that each of its designated monopolies:

(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale of the monopoly good or service in the relevant market, except to fulfil any terms of its designation that are not inconsistent with subparagraphs (b), (c) or (d); and

(b) in its purchase of the monopoly good or service,

(i) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of another Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(ii) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service sold by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(c) in its sale of the monopoly good or service:

(i) accords to an enterprise of another Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(ii) accords to an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments of investors of the Party, of any other Party, or of any non-Party; and

(d) does not use its monopoly position to engage in, either directly or indirectly, including through its dealings with its parent, subsidiaries, or other entities the Party or the designated monopoly owns, anticompetitive practices in a non-monopolised market in its territory that negatively affect trade or investment between the Parties.[14]

3. Paragraph 1(b) and (c) and paragraph 2 (b) and (c) do not preclude a state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly from:

(a) purchasing or selling goods or services on different terms or conditions including those relating to price; or

(b) refusing to purchase or sell goods or services,

provided that such differential treatment or refusal is undertaken in accordance with commercial considerations.

Article 17.5: Courts and Administrative Bodies

1. Each Party shall provide its courts with jurisdiction over civil claims against an enterprise owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign country based on a commercial activity carried on in its territory.[15] This shall not be construed to require a Party to provide jurisdiction over such claims if it does not provide jurisdiction over similar claims against enterprises that are not owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign country.

2. Each Party shall ensure that any administrative body that the Party establishes or maintains that regulates a state-owned enterprise exercises its regulatory discretion in an impartial manner with respect to enterprises that it regulates, including enterprises that are not state-owned enterprises.[16]

Article 17.6: Non-commercial Assistance

1. No Party shall cause[17] adverse effects to the interests of another Party through the use of non-commercial assistance that it provides, either directly or indirectly[18] to any of its state-owned enterprises with respect to:

(a) the production and sale of a good by the state-owned enterprise;

(b) the supply of a service by the state-owned enterprise from the territory of the Party into the territory of another Party;

(c) the supply of a service in the territory of another Party through an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of that other Party or a third Party.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its state enterprises and state-owned enterprises do not cause adverse effects to the interests of another Party through the use of non-commercial assistance that the state enterprise or state-owned enterprise provides to any of its state-owned enterprises with respect to:

(a) the production and sale of a good by the state-owned enterprise;

(b) the supply of a service by the state-owned enterprise from the territory of the Party into the territory of another Party;

(c) the supply of a service in the territory of another Party through an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of that other Party or a third Party.

3. No Party shall cause injury to a domestic industry[19] of another Party through the use of non-commercial assistance that it provides, either directly or indirectly, to any of its state-owned enterprises that is a covered investment in the territory of another Party in circumstances where:

(a) the non-commercial assistance is provided with respect to the production and sale of a good by the state-owned enterprise in the territory of the other Party, and

(b) a like good is produced and sold in the territory of the other Party by the domestic industry of that other Party.[20]

4. A service supplied by a state-owned enterprise of a Party within that Party’s territory shall be deemed to not cause adverse effects.[21]

Article 17.7: Adverse Effects

1. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance), adverse effects arise where:

(a) the effect of the non-commercial assistance is that the production and sale of a good by a Party’s state-owned enterprise that has received the non-commercial assistance displaces or impedes from the Party’s market imports of a like good of another Party or sales of a like good produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the Party;

(b) the effect of the non-commercial assistance is that the production and sale of a good by a Party’s state-owned enterprise that has received the non-commercial assistance displaces or impedes:

(i) from the market of another Party sales of a like good produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of that other Party, or imports of a like good of another Party; or

(ii) from the market of a non-Party imports of a like good of another Party;

(c) the effect of the non-commercial assistance is a significant price undercutting by a good produced by a Party’s state-owned enterprise that has received the non-commercial assistance and sold by the enterprise:

(i) in the market of a Party as compared with the price in the same market of imports of a like good of another Party or a like good that is produced by an enterprise that is a covered investment in the territory of the Party, or significant price suppression, price depression or lost sales in the same market; or

(ii) in the market of a non-Party as compared with the price in the same market of imports of a like good of another Party, or significant price suppression, price depression or lost sales in the same market;

(d) the effect of the non-commercial assistance is that services supplied by a Party's state-owned enterprise that has received the non-commercial assistance displace or impede from the market of another Party a like service supplied by a service supplier of that other Party or a third Party; or

(e) the effect of the non-commercial assistance is a significant price undercutting by a service supplied in the market of another Party by a Party’s state-owned enterprise that has received the non-commercial assistance as compared with the price in the same market of a like service supplied by a service supplier of that other Party or a third Party, or significant price suppression, price depression or lost sales in the same market.[22]

2. For the purposes of subparagraphs (a), (b), and (d) of paragraph 1, the displacing or impeding of a good or service includes any case in which it has been demonstrated that there has been a significant change in relative shares of the market to the disadvantage of the like good or like service. “Significant change in relative shares of the market” shall include any of the following situations:

(a) there is a significant increase in the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state-owned enterprise;

(b) the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state-owned enterprise remains constant in circumstances in which, in the absence of the non-commercial assistance, it would have declined significantly; or

(c) the market share of the good or service of the Party’s state-owned enterprise declines, but at a significantly slower rate than would have been the case in the absence of the non-commercial assistance.

The change must manifest itself over an appropriately representative period sufficient to demonstrate clear trends in the development of the market for the good or service concerned, which, in normal circumstances, shall be at least one year.

3. For the purposes of subparagraphs (c) and (e) of paragraph 1, price undercutting shall include any case in which such price undercutting has been demonstrated through a comparison of the prices of the good or service of the state-owned enterprise with the prices of the like good or service.

4. Comparisons of the prices in paragraph 3 shall be made at the same level of trade and at comparable times, and due account shall be taken for factors affecting price comparability. If a direct comparison of transactions is not possible, the existence of price undercutting may be demonstrated on some other reasonable basis, such as, in the case of goods, a comparison of unit values.

5. Non-commercial assistance that a Party provides

(a) before the signing of this Agreement, or

(b) within 3 years after the signing of this Agreement pursuant to a law that is enacted, or contractual obligation undertaken, prior to the signing of this Agreement

shall be deemed to not cause adverse effects.

6. For the purposes of 17.6.1(b) and 17.6.2(b), adverse effects are deemed not to arise from the initial capitalisation of a state-owned enterprise, or the acquisition by a Party of a controlling interest in an enterprise, that is principally engaged in the supply of services within the territory of the Party.

Article 17.8: Injury

1. For the purposes of Article 17.6.3 (Non-Commercial Assistance), the term “injury” shall be taken to mean material injury to a domestic industry, threat of material injury to a domestic industry or material retardation of the establishment of such an industry. A determination of material injury shall be based on positive evidence and involve an objective examination of the relevant factors, including the volume of production by the covered investment that has received non-commercial assistance, the effect of such production on prices for like goods produced and sold by the domestic industry, and the effect of such production on the domestic industry producing like goods.[23]

2. With regard to the volume of production by the covered investment that has received non-commercial assistance, consideration shall be given as to whether there has been a significant increase in the volume of production, either in absolute terms or relative to production or consumption in the territory of the Party in which injury is alleged to have occurred. With regard to the effect of the production by the covered investment on prices, consideration shall be given as to whether there has been a significant price undercutting by the goods produced and sold by the covered investment as compared with the price of like goods produced and sold by the domestic industry, or whether the effect of production by the covered investment is otherwise to depress prices to a significant degree or to prevent price increases, which otherwise would have occurred, to a significant degree. No one or several of these factors can necessarily give decisive guidance.

3. The examination of the impact on the domestic industry of the goods produced and sold by the covered investment that received the non-commercial assistance shall include an evaluation of all relevant economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the industry, such as actual and potential decline in output, sales, market share, profits, productivity, return on investments, or utilisation of capacity; factors affecting domestic prices; actual and potential negative effects on cash flow, inventories, employment, wages, growth, ability to raise capital or investments and, in the case of agriculture, whether there has been an increased burden on government support programmes. This list is not exhaustive, nor can one or several of these factors necessarily give decisive guidance.

4. It must be demonstrated that the goods produced and sold by the covered investment are, through the effects[24] of the non-commercial assistance, causing injury within the meaning of this Article. The demonstration of a causal relationship between the above mentioned goods and the injury to the domestic industry shall be based on an examination of all relevant evidence. Any known factors other than the goods produced by the covered investment which at the same time are injuring the domestic industry shall be examined, and the injuries caused by these other factors must not be attributed to the goods produced and sold by the covered investment that has received non-commercial assistance. Factors which may be relevant in this respect include, inter alia, the volumes and prices of other like goods in the market in question, contraction in demand or changes in the patterns of consumption, and developments in technology and the export performance and productivity of the domestic industry.

5. A determination of a threat of material injury shall be based on facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility. A determination of a threat of material injury shall be considered with special care. The change in circumstances which would create a situation in which non-commercial assistance to the covered investment would cause injury must be clearly foreseen and imminent. In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, there should be consideration of relevant factors[25] and of whether the totality of the factors considered lead to the conclusion that further availability of goods produced by the covered investment is imminent and that, unless protective action is taken, material injury would occur.

Article 17.9: Party-Specific Annexes

1. Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) and Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall not apply with respect to the non-conforming activities of state-owned enterprises or designated monopolies that a Party lists in its Schedule to Annex IV in accordance with the terms of the Party’s Schedule.

2. Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations), Article 17.5 (Courts and Administrative Bodies), Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance) and 17.10 (Transparency) shall not apply with respect to a Party’s state-owned enterprises or designated monopolies as set out in Annex 17-D.

3. (a) In the case of Singapore, Annex 17-E shall apply.

(b) In the case of Malaysia, Annex 17-F shall apply.

Article 17.10: Transparency[26][27]

1. Each Party shall provide to the other Parties or otherwise make publicly available on an official website a list of its state-owned enterprises within 6 months after the date on which this Agreement enters into force for the Party, and thereafter shall update the list annually.[28],[29]

2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Parties or otherwise make publicly available on an official website the designation of a monopoly or expansion of the scope of an existing monopoly and the terms of its designation.[30]

3. On the written request of another Party, a Party shall promptly provide the following information concerning a state-owned enterprise or a government monopoly, provided that the request includes an explanation of how the activities of the entity may be affecting trade or investment between the Parties:

(a) the percentage of shares that the Party, its state-owned enterprises, or designated monopolies cumulatively own, and percentage of votes that they cumulatively hold, in the entity;

(b) a description of any special shares or special voting or other rights that the Party, its state-owned enterprises, or designated monopolies hold, to the extent the rights are different than the rights attached to the general common shares of such entity;

(c) the government titles of any government official serving as an officer or member of the entity’s board of directors;

(d) the entity’s annual revenue and total assets over the most recent 3-year period for which information is available;

(e) any exemptions and immunities from which the entity benefits under the Party’s law; and

(f) any additional information regarding the entity that is publicly available, including annual financial reports and third-party audits, and that is sought in the written request.

4. On the written request of another Party, a Party shall promptly provide in writing information regarding any policy or programme, it has adopted or maintains that provides for the provision of non-commercial assistance, provided that the request includes an explanation of how the policy or programme affects or could affect trade or investment between the Parties.

5. When a Party provides a response pursuant to paragraph 4, the information it provides shall be sufficiently specific to enable the requesting Party to understand the operation of and evaluate the policy or programme and its effects or potential effects on trade or investment between the Parties. The Party responding to a request shall ensure that the information it provides contains the following information:

(a) the form of the non-commercial assistance provided under the policy or programme (i.e. grant, loan);

(b) the names of the government agencies, state-owned enterprises, or state enterprises providing the non-commercial assistance and the names of the state-owned enterprises that have received or are eligible to receive the non-commercial assistance;

(c) the legal basis and policy objective of the policy or programme providing for the non-commercial assistance;

(d) with respect to goods, the amount per unit or, in cases where this is not possible, the total amount or the annual amount budgeted for the non-commercial assistance (indicating, if possible, the average amount per unit in the previous year);

(e) with respect to services, the total amount or the annual amount budgeted for the non-commercial assistance (indicating, if possible, the total amount in the previous year);

(f) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non-commercial assistance in the form of loans or loan guarantees, the amount of the loan or amount of the loan guaranteed, interest rates, and fees charged;

(g) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non-commercial assistance in the form of the provision of goods or services, the prices charged, if any;

(h) with respect to policies or programmes providing for non-commercial assistance in the form of equity capital, the amount invested, the number and a description of the shares received, and any assessments that were conducted with respect to the underlying investment decision;

(i) duration of the policy or programme or any other time-limits attached to it; and

(j) statistical data permitting an assessment of the effects of the non-commercial assistance on trade or investment between the Parties.

6. Where a Party considers that it has not adopted or does not maintain any policies or programmes subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, it shall so inform the requesting Party in writing.

7. If any relevant points in paragraph 5 have not been addressed in the written response, an explanation shall be provided in the written response itself.

8. The Parties recognise that the provision of information under paragraphs 5 and 7 does not prejudge the legal status of the assistance that was the subject of the request under paragraph 4 or the effects of that assistance under this Agreement.

9. When a Party provides written information pursuant to a request under this Article and informs the requesting Party that it considers the information to be confidential, the requesting Party shall not disclose the information without the prior consent of the Party providing the information.

Article 17.11: Technical Cooperation

The Parties shall, where appropriate and subject to available resources, engage in mutually agreed technical cooperation activities, including:

(a) exchanging information regarding Parties’ experiences in improving the corporate governance and operation of their state-owned enterprises;

(b) sharing best practices on policy approaches to ensure a level playing field between state-owned and privately owned enterprises, including policies related to competitive neutrality; and

(c) organising international seminars, workshops, or any other appropriate forum for sharing technical information and expertise related to the governance and operations of state-owned enterprises.

Article 17.12: Committee on State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies[31]

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies, comprised of representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee’s functions shall include:

(a) reviewing and considering the operation and implementation of this Chapter;

(b) at a Party’s request, consulting on any matter arising under this Chapter;

(c) developing cooperative efforts, as appropriate, to promote the principles underlying the disciplines contained in this Chapter in the free trade area and to contribute to the development of similar disciplines in other regional and multilateral institutions in which two or more Parties participate; and

(d) undertaking such other activities as the Committee may agree.

3. The Committee shall meet within one year after the date this Agreement enters into force, and at least annually thereafter, unless the Parties agree otherwise. The Committee may meet in person, teleconference, video conference, or by any other means, as mutually determined by the Parties.

Article 17.13: Exceptions

1. Nothing in Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall be construed to:

(a) prevent the adoption or enforcement by any Party of measures to respond temporarily to a national or global economic emergency; or

(b) apply to a state-owned enterprise with respect to which a Party has adopted or enforced measures on a temporary basis in response to a national or global economic emergency, for the duration of that emergency.

2. Article 17.4.1 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) shall not apply with respect to the supply of financial services by a state-owned enterprise pursuant to a government mandate if that supply of financial services:

(a) supports exports or imports, provided that these services:

(i) are not intended to displace commercial financing, or

(ii) are offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market[32]; or

(b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided that these services:

(i) are not intended to displace commercial financing, or

(ii) are offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or

(c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided it falls within the scope of the Arrangement.

3. The supply of financial services by a state-owned enterprise pursuant to a government mandate shall be deemed to not give rise to adverse effects under Article 17.6.1(b) or Article 17.6.2(b) (Non-commercial Assistance), or under Article 17.6.1(c) or Article 17.6.2(c) (Non-commercial Assistance) where the Party in which the financial service is supplied requires a local presence in order to supply those services, if that supply of financial services:[33]

(a) supports exports and imports, provided that these services:

(i) are not intended to displace commercial financing, or

(ii) are offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or

(b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided that these services:

(i) are not intended to displace commercial financing, or

(ii) are offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial market; or

(c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided it falls within the scope of the Arrangement.

4. Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall not apply with respect to an enterprise located outside the territory of a Party over which a state-owned enterprise of that Party has assumed temporary ownership as a consequence of foreclosure or a similar action in connection with defaulted debt, or payment of an insurance claim by the state-owned enterprise associated with the supply of the financial services referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, provided that any support the Party, a state enterprise or state-owned enterprise of the Party, provides to the enterprise during the period of temporary ownership is provided in order to recoup the state-owned enterprise’s investment in accordance with a restructuring or liquidation plan that will result in the ultimate divestiture from the enterprise.

5. Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations), Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance), Article 17.10 (Transparency), and Article 17.12 (Committee on State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies) shall not apply with respect to a state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly if in any one of the three previous consecutive fiscal years, the annual revenue derived from the commercial activities of the enterprise was less than a threshold amount which shall be calculated in accordance with Annex 17-A. [34],[35]

Article 17.14: Further Negotiations

Within 5 years after entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall conduct further negotiations on extending the application of the disciplines in this Chapter in accordance with Annex 17-C.

Article 17.15: Process for Developing Information

Annex 17-B shall apply in any dispute under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) regarding a Party’s conformity with Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance).

ANNEX 17-A

THRESHOLD CALCULATION

1. At the time of entry into force of this Agreement, the threshold referenced in Article 17.13(5) (Exceptions) shall be 200 million Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).

2. The amount of the threshold shall be adjusted at three-year intervals with each adjustment taking effect in January, beginning 1 January 201x, in accordance with the formula set out in this Annex.

3. The threshold shall be adjusted for changes in general price levels using a composite SDR inflation rate, calculated as a weighted sum of cumulative percent changes in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) deflators of SDR component currencies over the three-year period ending 30 June of the year prior to the adjustment taking effect, and using the following formula:

where,

= threshold value at base period

= new (adjusted) threshold value

= respective (fixed) weights of each currency, , in the SDR (as at 30 June of the year prior to adjustment taking effect)

= cumulative percent change in the GDP deflator of each currency, , in the SDR over the three-year period ending 30 June of the year prior to adjustment taking effect.

4. Parties shall convert the threshold into national currency terms where the conversion rates will be the average of monthly values of each Party’s national currency in SDR terms over the three-year period to 30 June of the year before the threshold is to take effect. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of their applicable threshold in their respective national currencies.

5. All data for the purposes of this Chapter are to be drawn from the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database.

6. The Parties shall consult if a major change in a national currency vis-à-vis the SDR were to create a significant problem with regard to the application of this Chapter.

ANNEX 17-B

PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING INFORMATION CONCERNING STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES

1. Where an arbitral tribunal has been established pursuant to Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) to examine a complaint arising under Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) or Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance), the disputing Parties may exchange written questions, as set forth in paragraphs 2 through 4, to obtain information relevant to the complaint that is not otherwise readily available.

2. A disputing Party (the “questioning Party”) may provide written questions to the other disputing Party (the “answering Party”) within 15 days of the date the tribunal is established. The answering Party shall provide its responses to the questions to the questioning Party within 30 days from the date it receives the questions.

3. The questioning Party may provide any follow-up written questions to the answering Party within 15 days of the date it receives the responses to the initial questions. The answering Party shall provide its responses to the follow-up questions to the questioning Party within 30 days from the date it receives the follow-up questions.

4. If the questioning Party considers that the answering Party has failed to cooperate in the information-gathering process, the questioning Party shall inform the tribunal and the answering Party in writing within 30 days of the date the responses to the questioning Party’s final questions are due, and provide the basis for this view. The tribunal shall afford the answering Party an opportunity to reply in writing.

5. Each disputing Party that provides written questions or answers to the other disputing Party pursuant to these procedures shall, on the same day, provide the questions or answers to the tribunal. In the event that a tribunal has not yet been composed, each disputing Party shall, upon the composition of the tribunal, promptly provide the tribunal with any questions or responses it has provided to the other disputing Party.

6. The answering Party may designate information in its responses as confidential information in accordance with the procedures set out in the Rules of Procedure established pursuant to Article 27.2.1(e) (Functions of the Commission) or other rules of procedure agreed to by the Parties.

7. The time periods in paragraphs 2 through 4 may be modified upon agreement of the Parties or approval by the arbitral tribunal.

8. In determining whether a disputing Party has failed to cooperate in the information-gathering process, the tribunal shall take into account the reasonableness of the questions and the efforts the answering Party has made to respond to the questions in a cooperative and timely manner.

9. In making findings of fact and its initial determination, the tribunal should draw adverse inferences from instances of non-cooperation by a disputing Party in the information-gathering process.

10. The tribunal may deviate from the time period set out in Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for the issuance of the initial determination where necessary to accommodate the information-gathering process.

11. The tribunal may seek additional information from a disputing Party that was not provided to the tribunal through the information-gathering process where the tribunal considers the information necessary to resolve the dispute. However, the tribunal shall not request additional information to complete the record where the information would support a Party’s position and the absence of that information in the record is the result of that Party’s non-cooperation in the information-gathering process.

ANNEX 17-C

FURTHER NEGOTIATIONS

Within 5 years after entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall conduct further negotiations on extending the application of:

(a) the disciplines in this Chapter to the activities of state-owned enterprises that are owned or controlled, and designated monopolies designated, by a sub-central level of government, where such activities have been listed in Parties’ schedules to Annex 17-D; and

(b) the disciplines in 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance) and 17.7 (Adverse Effects) to address effects caused in a market of a non-Party through the supply of services by a state-owned enterprise.

ANNEX 17-D

APPLICATION TO SUB-CENTRAL

STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES

Pursuant to Article 17.9.2 (Party-Specific Annexes), the following obligations shall not apply with respect to a state-owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sub-central level of government and a designated monopoly designated by a sub-central level of government[36]:

(a) for Australia:

(i) Article 17.4.1 (a) and (b) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Articles 17.6.1(a) and 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Australia;

(iv) Article 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(v) Article 17.10.1 (Transparency).

(b) for Canada:

(i) Articles 17.4:1(a) and (b) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4:1(c)(i) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Article 17.4:2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iv) Article 17.5:2 (Courts and Administrative Bodies), with respect to administrative regulatory bodies established or maintained by a sub-central level of government;

(v) Articles 17.6:1(a) and Article 17.6:2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment;

(vi) Articles 17.6:1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6:2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance);

(vii) Article 17.6:3 (Non-Commercial Assistance);

(viii) Article 17.10:1 (Transparency); and

(ix) Article 17.10:4 (Transparency), with respect to a policy or programme adopted or maintained by a sub-central level of government.

(c) For Chile:

(i) Article 17.4.1 (a) and (b) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.1 (c) (i) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Article 17.4.2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iv) Article 17.6.1 (a) and Article 17.6.2 (a) (Non-Commercial Assistance)with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Chile;

(v) Article 17.6.1 (b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance), and Article 17.6.2 (b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(vi) Article 17.10.1 (Transparency).

(d) for Japan:

(i) Article 17.4.1 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Article 17.6.1(a) and Article 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance) with respect to the production and sale of a good:

A. by a state-owned enterprise in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment of another Party in the territory of Japan or

B. by a state-owned enterprise that is a covered investment in competition with like good produced and sold by a covered investment of another Party in the territory of any other Party;

(iv) Article 17.6.1(b)(c) and Article 17.6.2(b)(c) (Non-Commercial Assistance);

(v) Article 17.6.3 (Non-Commercial Assistance);; and

(vi) Article 17.10.1 (Transparency).

(e) for Malaysia

(i) Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.5.2 (Courts and Administrative Bodies) with respect to administrative regulatory bodies established or maintained by a sub-central level of government;

(iii) Article 17.6.1(a) and Article 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Malaysia;

(iv) Articles 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(v) Article 17.10 (Transparency).

(f) for Mexico:

(i) Article 17.4.1 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Article 17.6.1(a) and Article 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Mexico;

(iv) Article 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance)and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(v) Article 17.10 (Transparency).

(g) for New Zealand:

(i) Article 17.4.1 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Article 17.6.1 (a) and 17.6.2 (a) (Non-Commercial Assistance) with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of New Zealand;

(iv) Article 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance);

(v) Article 17.6.3 (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(vi) Article 17.10.1 (Transparency).

(h) for Peru:

(i) Article 17.4.1(a) and (b) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.1(c)(i) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iii) Article 17.4.2 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iv) Articles 17.6.1(a) and 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Peru;

(v) Article 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and,

(vi) Article 17.10.1 (Transparency).

(i) for the United States:

(i) Article 17.4.1 (a) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(ii) Article 17.4.1 (b) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations), with respect to purchases of a good or service;

(iii) Article 17.4.1(c)(i) (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(iv) Article 17.4.2, with respect to designated monopolies designated by a sub-central level of government;

(v) Article 17.5.2 (Courts and Administrative Bodies), with respect to administrative regulatory bodies established or maintained by a sub-central level of government;

(vi) Article 17.6.1(a) and Article 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of the United States;

(vii) Article 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(viii) Article 17.10.1 (Transparency)

(j) For Vietnam:

(i) Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations)

(ii) Article 17.5.2 (Courts and Administrative Bodies), with respect to administrative regulatory bodies established or maintained by a sub-central level of government

(iii) Articles 17.6.1(a) and 17.6.2(a) (Non-Commercial Assistance), with respect to the production and sale of a good in competition with a like good produced and sold by a covered investment in the territory of Viet Nam;

(iv) Articles 17.6.1(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance) and Article 17.6.2(b) and (c) (Non-Commercial Assistance); and

(i) Article 17.10 (Transparency)

ANNEX 17-E

SINGAPORE

1. Neither Singapore, nor a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore[37], shall take action to direct or influence decisions of a state-owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore, including through the exercise of any rights or ownership interests over such state-owned enterprises, except in a manner consistent with this Chapter. However, Singapore, or a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore, may exercise its voting rights in any state-owned enterprise it owns or controls through ownership interests in a manner that is not inconsistent with this Chapter.

2. Article 17.4.1 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) shall not apply with respect to a state-owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore.

3. Article 17.6.2 (Non-Commercial Assistance) shall not apply with respect to a state-owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore, unless:

(a) in the five-year period preceding the purported breach of Article 17.6.2 (Non-Commercial Assistance), Singapore or a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore has:

(i) appointed[38] the CEO or a majority of the other senior management of the state-owned enterprise;

(ii) appointed a majority of the members of the board of directors of that state-owned enterprise;[39] or

(iii) taken action to exercise its legal rights in that state-owned enterprise to actively direct and control the business decisions of that state-owned enterprise in a manner that would be inconsistent with the obligations in this chapter; or

(b) the state-owned enterprise, pursuant to law, government policy or other measures, is required to:

(i) provide non-commercial assistance to another state-owned enterprise; or

(ii) make decisions about its commercial purchase or sales.

4. Singapore is deemed to comply with Article 17.10.1 (Transparency) with respect to any state-owned enterprise owned or controlled by a sovereign wealth fund of Singapore if:

(a) Singapore provides to the other Parties or otherwise makes publicly available on an official website the annual report of the sovereign wealth fund which owns that state-owned enterprise;

(b) any class of securities of that state-owned enterprise is listed on a securities exchange regulated by a member of an internationally recognised securities commissions body including the International Organisation of Securities Commissions; or

(c) that state-owned enterprise files its annual financial reports based on internationally-recognised financial reporting standards including the International Financial Reporting Standards.

ANNEX 17-F

MALAYSIA

Permodalan Nasional Berhad

1. The Obligations in this Chapter shall not apply with respect to Permodalan Nasional Berhad or an enterprise owned or controlled by Permodalan Nasional Berhad, provided that Permodalan Nasional Berhad:

(a) engages exclusively in the following activities:

(i) administering or providing a plan for members of the public relating to collective investment schemes for the purpose of enhancing their savings and investments, in furtherance of a national agenda solely for the benefit of natural persons who are participants to such a plan and their beneficiaries, or

(ii) investing the assets of these plans;

(b) has a fiduciary duty to the natural persons referenced in sub-paragraph (a); and

(c) is free from investment direction from the government of Malaysia[40].

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Article 17 6.1 and Article 17 6.3 (Non-Commercial Assistance) shall apply with respect to Malaysia’s:

(a) direct or indirect provision of non-commercial assistance to an enterprise owned or controlled by Permodalan Nasional Berhad;[41] and

(b) indirect provision of non-commercial assistance through an enterprise owned or controlled by Permodalan Nasional Berhad.

Lembaga Tabung Haji

1. The Obligations in this Chapter shall not apply with respect to Lembaga Tabung Haji or an enterprise owned or controlled by Lembaga Tabung Haji, provided that Lembaga Tabung Haji:

(a) engages exclusively in the following activities:

(i) administering or providing a personal savings and investment plan solely for the benefit of the natural persons who are contributors to such a plan and their beneficiaries, for the purpose of:

A. enabling individual Muslim beneficiaries, through the investment of their savings in investment activities permissible in Islam, to support their expenditure during pilgrimage; and

B. protecting, safeguarding the interests and ensuring the welfare of pilgrims during pilgrimage by providing various facilities and services, or

(ii) investing the assets of these plans;

(b) has a fiduciary duty to the natural persons referenced in sub-paragraph (a); and

(c) is free from investment direction from the government of Malaysia[42].

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Article 17 6.1 and Article 17 6.3 (Non-Commercial Assistance) shall apply with respect to Malaysia’s:

(a) direct or indirect provision of non-commercial assistance to an enterprise owned or controlled by Lembaga Tabung Haji; and

(b) indirect provision of non-commercial assistance through an enterprise owned or controlled by Lembaga Tabung Haji.

ANNEX IV

NON-CONFORMING ACTIVITIES

Note

1. The Schedule of a Party to this Annex sets out, pursuant to Article 17.9.1 (Party-Specific Annexes), the non-conforming activities of a state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly, with respect to which some or all of the following obligations do not apply:

(a) Article 17.4 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations);

(b) Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance);

2. Each Schedule entry sets out the following elements:

(a) Obligations Concerned specifies the article(s) referred to in paragraph 1 that, pursuant to Article 17.9.1, do not apply to the non-conforming activities of the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly, as set out in paragraph 3;

(b) Entity identifies the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly that undertakes the non-conforming activities for which the entry is made;

(c) Scope of Non-conforming Activities provides a description of the scope of non-conforming activities of the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly for which the entry is made;

(d) Measures identifies, for transparency purposes, a non-exhaustive list of the laws, regulations or other measures pursuant to which the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly engages in the non-conforming activities for which the entry is made.

3. In accordance with Article 17.9.1, the articles of this Agreement specified in the Obligations Concerned element of an entry do not apply to the non-conforming activities (identified in the Scope of Non-conforming Activities element of that entry) of the state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly (identified in the Entity element of that entry).

[1] For greater certainty, activities undertaken by an enterprise which operates on a not-for-profit basis or on a cost-recovery basis are not activities undertaken with an orientation toward profit-making.

[2] For greater certainty, measures of general application to the relevant market shall not be construed as the determination by a Party of pricing, production, or supply decisions of an enterprise.

[3] Investment direction from the government of a Party (a) does not include general guidance with respect to risk management and asset allocation that is not inconsistent with usual investment practices; and (b) is not demonstrated, alone, by the presence of government officials on the enterprise’s board of directors or investment panel.

[4] For greater certainty, non-commercial assistance does not include (a) intra-group transactions within a corporate group including state-owned enterprises (e.g. between the parent and subsidiaries of the group, or among the group's subsidiaries) when normal business practices require reporting the financial position of the group excluding these intra-group transactions, (b) other transactions between state-owned enterprises that are consistent with the usual practices of privately owned enterprises in arm’s length transactions, or (c) a Party's transfer of funds, collected from contributors to a plan for pension, retirement, social security, disability, death or employee benefits, or any combination thereof, to an independent pension fund for investment on behalf of the contributors and their beneficiaries.

[5] In determining whether the assistance is provided “by virtue of that enterprise’s government ownership or control,” account shall be taken of the extent of diversification of economic activities within the territory of the Party, as well as of the length of time during which the non-commercial assistance programme has been in operation.

[6] For greater certainty, a service to the general public includes:

(a) the distribution of goods; and

(b) the supply of general infrastructure services.

[7] For greater certainty, the Parties understand that the word “arrangements” as an alternative to “funds” allows for a flexible interpretation of the legal arrangement through which the assets can be invested.

[8] For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms “financial service supplier,” “financial institution” and “financial services” have the same meaning as in Article 11.1 (Definitions).

[9] This Chapter also applies with respect to the activities of state-owned enterprises of a Party that cause adverse effects in the market of a non-Party as provided in Article 17.7 (Adverse Effects).

[10] Malaysia shall not be subject to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) with respect to enterprises owned or controlled by Khazanah Nasional Berhad for a period of two years following the entry into force of this Agreement, in light of ongoing development of state-owned enterprise reform legislation.

[11] For the purposes of this paragraph, “a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” has the same meaning as in the WTO General Agreement in Trade in Services, including the meaning in the Financial Services Annex where applicable.

[12] Examples of regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority include the power to expropriate, grant licences, approve commercial transactions, or impose quotas, fees or other charges.

[13] Article 17.4.1 (Non-discriminatory treatment and commercial considerations) shall not apply with respect to the purchase or sale of shares, stock or other forms of equity by a state-owned enterprise as a means of its equity participation in another enterprise.

[14] For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the requirements of sub-paragraph (d) through the enforcement or implementation of its generally applicable national competition laws and regulations, its economic regulatory laws and regulations, or other appropriate measures.

[15] Article 17.5.1 (Courts and Administrative Bodies) shall not be construed to preclude a Party from providing its courts with jurisdiction over claims against enterprises owned or controlled through ownership interests by a foreign country other than those claims referred to in this paragraph.

[16] For greater certainty, the impartiality with which an administrative body exercises its regulatory discretion is to be assessed by reference to a pattern or practice of that administrative body.

[17] For the purposes of Article 17.6(1) and (2) (Non-commercial Assistance), it must be demonstrated that the adverse effects claimed have been caused by the non-commercial assistance. Thus, the non-commercial assistance must be examined within the context of other possible causal factors to ensure an appropriate attribution of causality.

[18] For greater certainty, indirect provision includes the situation in which a Party entrusts or directs an enterprise that is not a state-owned enterprise to provide non-commercial assistance.

[19] The term “domestic industry” refers to the domestic producers as a whole of the like good, or to those domestic producers whose collective output of the products constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of the like good, excluding the state-owned enterprise that is a covered investment that has received the non-commercial assistance referred to in paragraph 3.

[20] In situations of material retardation of the establishment of a domestic industry, it is understood that a domestic industry may not yet produce and sell the like good. However, in such cases, there must be evidence that a prospective domestic producer has made a substantial commitment to commence production and sales of the like good.

[21] For greater certainty, this paragraph shall not be construed to apply to a service that is itself a form of non-commercial assistance.

[22] The purchase or sale of shares, stock or other forms of equity by a state-owned enterprise that has received non-commercial assistance as a means of its equity participation in another enterprise shall not be construed to give rise to adverse effects as provided for in 17.7.1 (Adverse Effects).

[23] The periods for examination of the non-commercial assistance and injury shall be reasonably established and shall end as closely as practical to the date of initiation of the proceeding before the arbitral tribunal.

[24] As set forth in paragraph 2 and 3.

[25] In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, an arbitral tribunal established pursuant to Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) should consider, inter alia, such factors as: (i) the nature of the non-commercial assistance in question and the trade effects likely to arise therefrom; (ii) a significant rate of increase in sales in the domestic market by the covered investment, indicating a likelihood of substantially increased sales; (iii) sufficient freely disposable, or an imminent, substantial increase in, capacity of the covered investment indicating the likelihood of substantially increased production of the good, taking into account the availability of export markets to absorb additional production; (iv) whether prices of goods sold by the covered investment will have a significant depressing or suppressing effect on the price of the like goods; and (v) inventories of like good.

[26] Article 17.10 (Transparency) shall not apply to Brunei Darussalam with respect to the Entities listed in entry 4 (BIA) of Brunei Darussalam’s Annex IV that engage in the non-conforming activities described in that entry.

[27] Article 17.10 (Transparency) shall not apply to Viet Nam with respect to the Entities listed in:

(a) entry 8 of Viet Nam’s Annex IV that engage in the non-conforming activities described in that entry, until that entry ceases to have effect; and

(b) entry 10 of Viet Nam’s Annex IV that engage in the non-conforming activities described in that entry.

[28] For Brunei Darussalam, Article 17.10.1 (Transparency) shall not apply until five years from the date of entry into force of the Agreement for Brunei. Separately, within a period of three years after entry into force of the Agreement, Brunei Darussalam shall provide to the other Parties or otherwise make publicly available on an official website a list of its state-owned enterprises that have an annual revenue derived from their commercial activities of more than SDR 500 million in one of the three preceding years, and shall thereafter update the list annually, until the obligation in Article 17.10.1 (Transparency) applies and replaces this obligation.

[29] For Vietnam and Malaysia, Article 17.10.1 (Transparency) shall not apply until five years from the date of entry into force of the Agreement for Vietnam and Malaysia, respectively. Separately, within six months after the date on which this Agreement enters into force for Vietnam and Malaysia, respectively, each Party shall provide to the other Parties or otherwise make publicly available on an official website a list of its state-owned enterprises that have an annual revenue derived from their commercial activities of more than SDR 500 million in one of the three preceding years, and shall thereafter update the list annually, until the obligation in Article 17.10.1 (Transparency) applies and replaces this obligation.

[30] Article 17.10.2, Article 17.10.3 and Article 17.10.4 (Transparency) shall not apply to Viet Nam with respect to the Entities listed in entry 9 of Vietnam’s Annex IV that engage in the non-conforming activities described in that entry.

[31] Article 17.12 (Committee on State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies) shall not apply to Viet Nam with respect to the Entities listed in:

(a) entry 8 of Viet Nam’s Annex IV that engage in the non-conforming activities described in that entry, until that entry ceases to have effect; and

(b) entry 10 of Viet Nam’s Annex IV that engage in the non-conforming activities described in that entry.

[32] In circumstances where no comparable financial services are offered in the commercial market: (1) for the purposes of paragraphs 2(a)(ii), 2(b)(ii), 3(a)(ii) and 3(b)(ii), the enterprise may rely as necessary on available evidence to establish a benchmark of the terms on which such services would be offered in the commercial market; and (2) for the purposes of subparagraphs 2(a)(i), 2(b)(i), 3(a)(i), and 3(b)(i), the supply of the financial services shall be deemed not to be intended to displace commercial financing.

[33] For the purposes of Article 17.13.3 (Exceptions), in cases where the country in which the financial service is supplied requires a local presence in order to supply those services, the supply of the financial services identified in Article 17.13.3 (Exceptions) through an enterprise that is a covered investment shall be deemed to not give rise to adverse effects.

[34] When a Party invokes this exception during consultations conducted pursuant to Article 28.5 (Consultations), the consulting Parties should exchange and discuss available evidence concerning the state-owned enterprise’s annual revenue derived from the commercial activities during the three previous consecutive fiscal years in an effort to resolve any disagreement regarding the application of this exception during the consultations period.

[35] Notwithstanding Article 17.13.5 (Exceptions), for a period of five years after entry into force of this Agreement, Article 17.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations) and Article 17.6 (Non-commercial Assistance) shall not apply with respect to a state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly of Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia or Vietnam, if in any one of the three previous consecutive fiscal years, the annual revenue derived from the commercial activities of the enterprise was less than SDR 500 million.

[36] For the purposes of Annex 17-D, “sub-central level of government” means the regional level of government and the local level of government of a Party.

[37] For the purposes of this Chapter, sovereign wealth funds of Singapore include GIC Private Limited and Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited. Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited is the legal owner of its assets.

[38] For paragraph 3.a(i) and 3.a(ii), such appointment includes an appointment that occurred before the aforementioned five-year period, provided the tenure falls during that period.

[39] For greater certainty, the mere exercise of a shareholder vote to approve the election of directors does not constitute the appointment of such directors.

[40] Investment direction from the government of Malaysia: (a) does not include general guidance of the Malaysian Government with respect to risk management and asset allocation that is not inconsistent with usual investment practices; and (b) is not demonstrated, alone, by the presence of Malaysian government officials on the enterprise’s board of directors or investment panel.

[41] For greater certainty, for the purpose of Annex 17-F, non-commercial assistance does not include Malaysia’s transfer of funds collected from contributors to Permodalan Nasional Berhad or Lembaga Tabung Haji for investment on behalf of the contributors and their beneficiaries.

[42] Investment direction from the government of Malaysia: (a) does not include general guidance of the Malaysian Government with respect to risk management and asset allocation that is not inconsistent with usual investment practices; and (b) is not demonstrated, alone, by the presence of Malaysian government officials on the enterprise’s board of directors or investment panel.


*************** Chapter 18 ***************

--- Intellectual Property ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/3479efdc7adf)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Intellectual Property (IP) chapter will help Americans take full advantage of our country’s innovative strengths and help to promote trade and innovation, as well as to advance scientific, technological and creative exchange throughout the region. The chapter combines strong and balanced protections with effective enforcement of those protections, consistent with existing U.S. law. This will promote high standards of protection, safeguard U.S. exports and consumers against IP infringement, and provide fair access to legal systems in the region to enforce those rights. Drawing from and building on other bilateral and regional trade agreements, it includes commitments to combat counterfeiting, piracy and other infringement, including trade secret theft; obligations to facilitate legitimate digital trade, including in creative content; and provisions to promote development of, and access to, innovative and generic medicines.

Overview

Common Understanding Relating to IP Systems

The Intellectual Property chapter creates a set of shared understandings regarding IP systems, including that the protection and enforcement of IP rights should contribute to innovation and the dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of diverse stakeholders and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare.

Patents

Effective and Clear Patent StandardsThe Intellectual Property chapter defines a robust standard for patentability, consistent with international norms drawn from the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) as well as other international best practices, including relevant exclusions. TPP Parties also agree to adopt the best practice of allowing a grace period in which certain public disclosures of the invention (e.g., in papers published by university researchers or small inventors) will not be used to deny a patent application.Cooperation and TransparencyCooperation and transparency provisions on patenting in the IP chapter help facilitate the processing of patent applications in multiple jurisdictions, with a minimum of red tape. These features should particularly benefit small- and medium-sized enterprises.Promoting the Development and Availability of Innovative and Generic MedicinesThe Intellectual Property chapter also includes commitments to promote not only the development of innovative, life-saving drugs and treatments, but also robust generic medicine markets. Drawing on the principles underlying the “May 10, 2007” Congressional-Executive Agreement,included in agreements with Peru, Colombia, Panama, and Korea, the chapter includes transitions for certain pharmaceutical IP provisions, taking into account a Party’s level of development and capacity as well as its existing laws and international obligations.Enabling Public Health ProtectionsThe chapter incorporates the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, and confirms that Parties are not prevented from taking measures to protect public health, including to respond to epidemics such as HIV/AIDS.

Protection for Regulatory Test Data

Promoting Investments in the Development and Testing of Safe and Effective Medicines and Agrochemical ProductsThe Intellectual Property chapter includes commitments related to protection of undisclosed test and other data generated to obtain marketing approval of pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals.

Trademarks and Geographical Indications

Clear and Predictable Trademark DisciplinesThe Intellectual Property chapter includes commitments clarifying and strengthening protection of the brand names and other signs or symbols businesses use to distinguish their goods and services in the marketplace.Keeping Generic Terms Available For U.S. ProducersThe chapter helps address the potential for inappropriately “overprotecting” geographical indications in ways that shut out U.S. agricultural and food producers, including by providing opportunities for due process and requiring guidelines on how TPP partners should determine whether a term is generic in its market, as well as safeguards for owners of pre-existing trademarks.Fair, Efficient and Accessible ProceduresThe TPP Parties agree to efficient and transparent procedures governing trademark applications, including through electronic trademark registration mechanisms, reduction of red tape, ensuring respect for certification and collective trademarks, and promotion of regional harmonization of trademark systems.

Copyright

Strong and Balanced Copyright and Related RightsThe Intellectual Property chapter’s copyright provisions establish commitments drawn from international norms to respect the rights of creators and establish clear protection of works such as songs, movies, books, and software programs. They also include strong and balanced provisions on technological protection measures and rights management information, and advance transparency in systems for copyright royalty collection. As a complement to these commitments, the chapter also includes an obligation to promote balance in copyright systems through exceptions and limitations to copyright for legitimate purposes, such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research.Internet Service Provider Safe HarborsThe Intellectual Property chapter requires Parties to establish copyright safe harbors for Internet Service Providers (ISPs). In the United States, safe harbors allow legitimate ISPs to develop their business, while also helping to address Internet copyright infringement in an effective manner. Safe harbors have contributed to the flourishing of the most vibrant Internet, entertainment and e-commerce industries in the world. TPP does not include any obligations on these ISPs to monitor content on their networks or systems. TPP also provides for safeguards against abuse of such safe harbor regimes.

Trade Secrets

The Intellectual Property chapter requires TPP Parties to provide for the legal means to prevent misappropriation of trade secrets, including misappropriation conducted by State-owned enterprises. It also requires TPP Parties to establish criminal procedures and penalties for trade secret theft, including by means of cyber-theft.

IP Enforcement

Effective IP Enforcement SystemsThe IP chapter’s commitments on enforcement ensure the availability of mechanisms to enforce intellectual property rights, including civil and administrative procedures and remedies, provisional measures, border measures, and criminal enforcement. For example, these measures include disciplines on camcording in movie theaters and theft of encrypted program-carrying satellite and cable signals.Counterfeit Goods in Cross-Border Supply ChainsThe chapter includes robust commitments to tackle the challenges of trafficking in counterfeit trademark goods and pirated copyright goods within supply chains in the Asia-Pacific region. These provisions aim to close loopholes used by counterfeiters and to enhance penalties against trafficking in counterfeit trademark products that threaten health and safety.Effective Border ProtectionThe chapter ensures that border officials may act on their own initiative to identify and seize imported and exported counterfeit trademark and pirated copyright goods

New Features

Criminal Penalties for Trade Secret Theft

TPP is the first Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to require criminal penalties for trade secret theft, including by means of a computer system. This is a significant step forward for TPP Parties, and an important precedent in a region in which U.S. companies are facing significant challenges involving trade secret theft.

Clarifications Regarding State-Owned Enterprises

TPP is the first trade agreement to make clear that Parties cannot exclude State-owned enterprises from IP enforcement rules, including trade secret enforcement procedures, subject to certain TRIPS Agreement disciplines.

Tackling the Challenges of Asia-Pacific Counterfeit and Pirated Goods Supply Chains

TPP builds on previous U.S. FTAs that establish criminal penalties against trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy consistent with U.S. law, breaking new ground by including new provisions aimed at addressing concerns about cross-border supply chains of counterfeit and pirated goods, including those activities that threaten consumer health and safety.

Enforcement in the Digital Environment

TPP is the first FTA to clarify that IPR enforcement should be available against infringement in the digital environment and not just against physical products. Some countries in the WTO have asserted that existing IP enforcement commitments do not apply online or to digital products.

Promoting New Online Business Models for Delivering Content

TPP takes additional steps toward promoting legitimate digital trade, including the delivery of movies, music, software, and books online. In particular, the ISP copyright safe harbor section helps to provide certainty and predictability about the scope of the safe harbors, as in prior FTAs, while also reflecting the diversity of approaches in the TPP countries, and ensuring that existing effective systems, such as ones upon which rights holders, ISPs, and consumers have come to rely in the course of digital trade, can stay in place. TPP also recognizes the important role of collective management societies for copyright and related rights in collecting and distributing royalties through fair, efficient, transparent, and accountable practices, which promote a rich and accessible digital marketplace for content.

Copyright Exceptions and Limitations

As a complement to the TPP provisions aimed at providing effective protection and enforcement of copyright in the digital age and those aimed at ensuring respect for the rights of creators, the TPP requires that Parties continuously seek to achieve an appropriate balance in their copyright systems through providing copyright exceptions and limitations for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research.

Preventing Domain Name Cyber-Squatting

In an effort to reduce domain name cybersquatting, the TPP ensures that, in connection with a Party’s country-code top-level domain name registration system, appropriate remedies are available in cases of bad faith registration of domain names that are confusingly similar to registered trademarks.

Biologics and Pharmaceutical IP

The TPP includes additional specific rules related to biologic medicines, reflecting the growing importance of these cutting-edge technologies. These commitments are intended to promote innovation and promote access to affordable medicines in developing countries. TPP gives partner countries two ways to meet a strong standard for effective market protection. One way is to provide a minimum standard of 8 years of data protection; the other way is to deliver a comparable outcome through a combination of at least 5 years of data protection measures and a country’s other measures (e.g. regulatory procedures or administrative actions). Both paths will result in the first extended term of market protection for biologics medicines in a trade agreement, both paths create further incentive for innovators to develop lifesaving medicines, and both paths will meet the balance we have been seeking between innovation and access in TPP. TPP also specifies the types of biologic products subject to the enhanced protection, and ensures that the Parties can review the provisions to keep pace with technological changes and other developments and recommend modifications, if appropriate. None of these provisions will change any U.S. healthcare program or the data protection that’s in existing U.S. law.

Geographic Indications (GIs)

The TPP will enhance due process and other disciplines on the use of GIs to address growing concerns of U.S. exporters, whose access to foreign markets can be undermined through overly expansive GI protections advocated by certain countries whose agricultural producers compete with U.S. exporters.

Cooperation Activities

Building on cooperative work in other fora, the TPP Parties agree to endeavor to cooperate, including on IP issues relevant to small and medium-sized enterprises, technical assistance for developing countries, and exchanging information on patent office search and examination results.

Impact

The United States, as an intellectual property-driven economy, is a center and global model for the development of 21st-century innovation, including in the Internet, medical, pharmaceutical technology, entertainment, agricultural, apparel, aerospace, and other rapidly advancing industries. American businesses, universities, and government labs conduct over $450 billion per year in research and development — 30 percent of the global R&D spending measured by the OECD. The United States is the world’s leader in fiber-optics, satellite technology, and aviation. It has developed thriving arts and entertainment, Internet, and digital industries. It is a center for the development of new medicines and biotechnology resulting in groundbreaking treatments and cures.

These industries thrive and rely on a sophisticated IP system, which creates incentives for investment in research and innovation not only through strong and balanced copyright, trademark, trade secret, and patent laws, but also through effective enforcement of IP rights. The data are striking — nearly 40 million American jobs were estimated to be directly or indirectly attributable to “IP-intensive” industries in 2012. American artists, inventors, and other innovators received $128 billion in IP royalties, license fees, and payments for audiovisual services in 2013–39 percent of the world total. In 2014, the United States had an $88.2 billion surplus in services trade with respect to IP-related licensing, which is, in turn, the driving force behind the U.S. trade surplus in services.

The Asia-Pacific region presents unique opportunities for U.S. innovators and creators. By 2030, estimates suggest, the region will be home to a middle class of 3.2 billion people. As such it will be the world’s fastest-growing market for a wide variety of innovative and creative products — from film, medicines, and new digital products for consumers, to civil aircraft and satellites for governments and businesses. America’s ability to serve this demand will help to underwrite a generation of growth in the United States, provide the revenue that will keep the United States at the leading edge of innovation and creativity in the future, and promote improvements in daily life, health, and safety throughout the region. Many of the TPP participants are already major markets for U.S. IP-intensive goods and services, and their companies are partners for U.S. creators and innovators. TPP offers a critical opportunity to deepen these relationships and create new ones.

The Asia-Pacific also presents critical challenges from an IP policy perspective. Regional piracy rates remain high, and cyber theft of trade secrets is rapidly growing. The region is also a thriving environment for the counterfeit industry. The trafficking in counterfeit goods drains revenues from innovative firms and threatens public health and safety through the proliferation of potentially adulterated medicines, unsafe auto parts, and other products. As home not only to a large and growing middle class, but also to over one billion people earning $5 per day or less, the Asia-Pacific region is one in which promoting both the development of, and affordable access to, innovative and generic medicines requires effective and creative policies.

TPP’s IP chapter helps address these and related challenges, including through:

Improving strong and balanced protection of rights and enforcement of laws;Bolstering incentives for the development of, and trade related to, IP-intensive products;Addressing common threats, including piracy, counterfeiting, and other related infringements, as well as misappropriation (including cyber theft) of trade secrets;Promoting transparent, efficient, and fair regulatory systems, including for patent and trademark application and registration;Promoting development of and access to innovative and generic medicines;Facilitating legitimate digital trade, including in creative content; andPreventing the spread of overly-restrictive geographical indication policies, including by safeguarding the rights of prior trademark owners and rules clarifying the use of generic terms.


*************** Chapter 19 ***************

--- Labour ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/66e8e6f4e8d5)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP has the strongest protections for workers of any trade agreement in history, requiring all TPP Parties to adopt and maintain in their laws and practices the fundamental labor rights as recognized by the International Labor Organization (ILO), including freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining; elimination of forced labor; abolition of child labor; and the elimination of employment discrimination. It also includes commitments, again required for all TPP Parties, to have laws governing minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and health. All these are fully enforceable and backed up by trade sanctions.

This is vitally important in a part of the world where workers continue to face significant challenges, from inability to organize and join unions of their own choosing, to forced labor and child labor, and poor working conditions. These practices not only hurt workers in the countries with which we trade, but they also have significant impacts here in America, as a competition with workers who do not have the most basic of labor rights is fundamentally unfair, and creates incentives for a race to the bottom. TPP will create a fairer and more level playing field for American businesses and American workers by raising labor standards across the Asia-Pacific.

Overview

Labor rights

The Labor chapter establishes broad commitments that require all TPP Parties to adopt and maintain in their laws and practices the fundamental labor rights as recognized by the ILO, including freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining; elimination of forced labor; abolition of child labor; and the elimination of employment discrimination. It also includes commitments, again required for all TPP Parties, to have laws governing minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and health.

Implementation and enforcement of labor laws

The Labor chapter bars TPP Parties from waiving or derogating from laws implementing fundamental labor rights in a manner affecting trade or investment. In addition, for export processing zones, which present heightened concerns, it includes additional commitments not to waive or derogate from laws governing acceptable conditions of work with respect to minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and health. The chapter also includes commitments by TPP Parties not to fail to effectively enforce their labor laws in a sustained or recurring pattern that would affect trade or investment between the TPP Parties.

Dispute Settlement

Commitments in the Labor chapter are subject to the same dispute settlement procedures available for other chapters of TPP, including the availability of trade sanctions.

Forced labor

In addition to commitments by Parties to eliminate forced labor in their own countries, the Labor chapter includes commitments to discourage importation of goods that are produced by forced labor or that contain inputs produced by forced labor, regardless of whether the source country is a TPP country.

Transparency

The Labor chapter includes expansive commitments on transparency related to its own implementation and enforcement. These include commitments by TPP countries to ensure access to fair, equitable and transparent administrative and judicial proceedings, as guaranteed in U.S. law; and to provide remedies for violations of TPP countries’ labor laws. It also includes commitments related to public participation in its implementation, with TPP countries establishing mechanisms to obtain public input and to accommodate requests for information.

Cooperation Mechanisms and Capacity-Building

Recognizing the importance of cooperation to achieve our goals, the Labor chapter establishes a mechanism for cooperation and coordination on labor issues, including opportunities for stakeholder input in identifying areas of cooperation and participation, as appropriate, in cooperative activities. Areas of cooperation will be determined by the TPP countries jointly, with the range of issues including job creation and promotion of entrepreneurship; promotion of productivity, including in small- and medium-sized enterprises; awareness of and respect for ILO fundamental labor rights; eliminating discrimination, including against migrant workers, women and other workers; and other areas.

Labor Dialogue

To promote the rapid resolution of labor issues between TPP countries, the Labor chapter establishes a labor dialogue mechanism that countries can use to try to resolve any labor issue between them. This dialogue will allow for expeditious consideration of matters and help TPP countries to agree mutually to a course of action to address issues, such as through action plans, cooperative programs or capacity building. Whether or not TPP countries use the dialogue route, dispute settlement would always remain available to them.

New Features

To date, only four trade agreements in the world provide for strong, fully-enforceable requirements to adopt and maintain fundamental ILO labor rights and to effectively enforce labor laws — the U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with Peru, Panama, Colombia, and Korea. TPP’s Labor chapter extends these requirements to 10 new countries, more than quadrupling the number of people around the world covered by enforceable labor rights. TPP is also the first-ever trade agreement to include the following:

Commitments to discourage trade in goods produced by forced labor, including forced child labor.Commitments on adoption and maintenance of laws on acceptable working conditions, including minimum wage, hours of work, and occupational safety and health.Commitments to require countries not to weaken labor protections in export processing zones.

In addition, the United States has concluded bilateral implementation plans with several individual TPP countries to ensure that their laws and practices are consistent with international standards, including through reforms of laws, regulations, institutions, and practice. The commitments in the implementation plans are subject to TPP dispute settlement procedures, meaning they are fully enforceable and backed up by trade sanctions. The implementation plans also establish bilateral mechanisms beyond those in the labor chapter to ensure ongoing engagement, monitoring, and reporting on the implementation of those commitments. They include:

VietnamThe Vietnam implementation plan includes historic commitments on the part of Vietnam to allow workers the autonomy to form and operate unions of their own choosing. Currently, all trade unions must be affiliated with the government-connected trade union confederation. Under TPP, Vietnam will allow workers to establish and join an independent union, with full autonomy to elect their leaders, adopt a constitution and rules, manage their affairs, bargain collectively, and strike. This comprehensive implementation plan includes legal, regulatory and institutional changes that strengthen the protection of all fundamental labor rights. These include protections against employer interference in union activity, protections for peaceful union activity, removal of certain restrictions on strikes, strengthened penalties against forced labor and protections against forced labor in drug rehabilitation centers, and increased protections against employment discrimination. Vietnam also commits to build the capacity of its institutions to enforce these laws, including the labor inspectorate. To ensure the continued implementation of these reforms over time, the plan establishes a review mechanism, including an independent labor expert committee that will monitor implementation and identify any challenges that may arise for at least the first ten years. The review mechanism includes a provision whereby the United States may withhold or suspend tariff reductions for Vietnam if Vietnam does not comply with its commitment to provide the right to form labor unions across enterprises and at higher levels within five years.MalaysiaThe Malaysia implementation plan commits Malaysia to significant legal and institutional reforms, in particular in the areas of forced labor and freedom of association. Related to forced labor, Malaysia commits to fully implement the recently passed amendments to the Anti-Trafficking law to allow trafficking victims to travel, work, and reside outside government facilities, including while under protection orders. Malaysia also commits to increasing protections related to the withholding of workers’ passports, recruitment fees and practices, contract substitution, decent housing and freedom of movement, and increase cooperation with sending countries to improve recruitment practices. Related to freedom of association and the right to bargain collectively, Malaysia commits to remove restrictions on union formation and strikes that have been in place for decades; to limit governmental discretion in registering and canceling a trade union; to allow foreign workers to assume leadership positions in unions (after working in the country for a period of time); and to remove restrictions on the subjects on which workers can collectively bargain with their employers. Malaysia also commits to address concerns that outsourcing or subcontracting may be used to undermine freedom of association or collective bargaining rights. The bilateral implementation plan creates a government-to-government review mechanism for at least seven years to oversee implementation of the commitments in the plan. This comprehensive package of reforms will help address the risks of exploitation that foreign workers face when migrating to another country to work.Brunei DarussalamBrunei only recently joined the ILO and had labor laws that lacked certain protections and guarantees that a modern labor-relations system would normally provide. Thanks in large part to pressure from TPP, Brunei recently passed legislation amending its labor laws to remove broad discretion of the government to register or cancel a trade union’s registration, prohibit anti-union practices, remove certain restrictions on union operations, and strengthen certain child labor protections. The Brunei implementation plan commits Brunei to additional reform of its trade union act and employment order that further limits the discretion of the government to register or cancel a union’s registration, establishes protections against interference in union activities, allows for international affiliation, provides procedures for collective bargaining and strikes, strengthens protections against child labor and forced labor, and ensures independent review of administrative decisions. Brunei also commits to implementing a minimum wage for the first time and to ensuring protections against employment discrimination. The implementation plan creates a government-to-government review mechanism for at least seven years to oversee implementation of the commitments in the plan.

In addition, Mexico is in the process of developing parallel reforms, including concerning its system for protecting collective bargaining and union representation rights.

Impact

The rapid development of the Asia-Pacific clearly produces great benefits for American consumers, and great opportunities for American exporters as the Asian middle class grows. But it also creates great pressure on American workers, who need and deserve confidence that international competition rests on productivity and creativity, and labor laws that respect and protect workers’ rights, and not on exploitation, denial of rights, dangerous factories and child labor. Likewise, when workers’ rights are not respected development is ultimately slowed, and the gains of trade are spread unevenly.

TPP is a chance to address these issues on a scale never before attempted. Several of our 11 TPP partners are countries, such as Vietnam and Malaysia, with which we have no trade and labor agreements at all. In other cases, the Labor chapters and side-agreements of existing agreements with TPP partners– i.e. the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) of 1993, and the U.S.-Chile and U.S.-Singapore agreements of 2003, and the U.S.-Australia agreement of 2004 — are weak in comparison to TPP and their substantive labor commitments are less enforceable than their obligations in other areas. Labor rights were in fact not included at all in the body of NAFTA. Rather, they were incorporated, after the fact, into a side agreement called the “North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation” under which a single provision — countries’ requirement to enforce their own labor laws related to child labor, occupational health and safety and minimum wage — was enforceable, but through the levy of a capped “monetary assessment.” NAFTA’s dispute settlement procedures did not apply. It was not until the groundbreaking “May 10, 2007” Congressional-Executive Agreement that countries were required to adopt and maintain the fundamental ILO rights in their laws and that all labor obligations were subject to full dispute settlement and trade sanctions.

TPP is therefore a unique opportunity to create the first enforceable standards for our new partners; to reform and modernize several of our existing agreements; and, ultimately, to set the foundations of a region-wide commitment to labor practices which meet international standards, ensure a level playing field for competition, and share the benefits of trade fairly.

To address these issues, TPP will require all signatory countries to afford their workers the rights that have been recognized as “fundamental” by the ILO: (1) freedom of association; (2) the right to bargain collectively; (3) freedom from forced labor; (4) freedom from child labor; and (5) freedom from discrimination in employment. The ILO has recognized these as “enabling” rights — rights that all others build upon and that make it possible to promote and realize decent and dignified work.

In addition, TPP signatories commit to take on a number of first-ever commitments:

A commitment to discourage imports made with forced labor, no matter what the origin of the goods. This addresses a growing global problem that, according to the ILO, currently affects 21 million men, women, and children and in industrial sectors generates about $43 billion in illegal profits worldwide annually. The United States has strong laws prohibiting trade in goods produced by forced labor, but in many other countries, more needs to be done to address this global challenge.A commitment to put in place laws on acceptable working conditions, including a minimum wage, limits on hours of work, and occupational safety and health, which are well established in the United States, but less so in many other countries around the world.Special commitments to protect labor standards in export processing zones (EPZs). These “EPZs” are special zones in which governments offer businesses special benefits to establish operations in the zones, such as exemptions from certain taxes or regulations. In some cases, governments also lower or provide exemptions from labor laws to attract investment, leading to poor and deteriorating labor standards. As the number of export processing zones has grown, the concern about workers’ rights and working conditions in these zones has also increased.Together, these provisions not only set the high-water mark for labor protections in a trade agreement, but mark a sea-change from early U.S. FTAs. TPP provides an opportunity to lock in those gains for nearly 40 percent of the global economy, bringing us closer to establishing a new global norm for labor rights in trade agreements. In particular, applying these standards to Mexico and Canada delivers on the President’s promise to renegotiate NAFTA.


*************** Chapter 20 ***************

--- Environment ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/a7f25cd180cb)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

The Asia-Pacific region faces an array of environmental challenges, including wildlife trafficking, illegal logging, illegal fishing, and marine pollution — which threaten human health, habitat and biodiversity. TPP’s Environment chapter, the most far-reaching ever achieved in a trade agreement, takes on these challenges by:

Creating enforceable commitments across a range of environmental issues and trans-national challenges such as wildlife trade, enforcement of national environmental laws, implementation of multilateral environmental agreements, elimination of environmentally destructive subsidies, and elimination of tariffs and other barriers to trade in environmentally-beneficial products and technologies.Developing closer cooperation among TPP governments to address trans-national threats and police environmental crimes such as endangered species trade and illegal fishing more effectively, and to help lower-income countries raise their capacity to administer environmental laws and conservation programs.Supporting inclusive and transparent future policymaking through rules requiring publication of laws and regulations, and through promoting broad public participation in policymaking and the TPP implementation.

Overview

Coverage and General Commitments

The Environment chapter includes commitments by all TPP Parties to effectively enforce their environmental laws and not to waive or derogate from environmental laws in order to attract trade or investment.

Dispute Settlement

Commitments in the Environment chapter will be enforced through the same dispute settlement procedures and mechanisms available for disputes arising under other chapters of the TPP Agreement, including the availability of trade sanctions.

Wildlife Trade

All TPP countries are parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), the world’s preeminent agreement to protect endangered species. The Environment chapter requires each TPP Party to implement its CITES obligations and effectively enforce its laws and regulations that achieve that end. The chapter also includes commitments to combat trade in wildlife, plants and fish — whether or not protected under CITES — if they have been taken illegally. These include commitments for TPP members to cooperate by sharing information relevant to the investigation of criminals engaged in wildlife trafficking. In addition, the chapter includes commitments to protect and conserve wildlife and plants in the TPP region, including through action by Parties to conserve specially protected natural areas, such as wetlands; to promote sustainable forest management; and to conserve wild fauna and flora.

Marine Fisheries

TPP caps decades of work in partnership with TPP members, including Peru and New Zealand, to reform fisheries subsidies and promote sustainable fishing, and brings others in the region to the effort — including Japan, operator of one of the world’s largest fishing fleets. The Environment chapter’s commitments for the protection of marine fisheries build on the obligations of certain regional fisheries management organizations, but generalize them beyond particular fishing areas and in some cases break new substantive ground.

For example, TPP countries agree to prohibit some of the most harmful fisheries subsidies, such as those given to illegal fishermen. They also agree to restrain new subsidy programs and enhancements to existing subsidy programs, and create enhanced transparency requirements related to such programs. In addition, the chapter includes commitments to promote sustainable fisheries management; to promote the long-term conservation of species at risk, such as sharks, sea turtles, seabirds and marine mammals; and to combat illegal fishing, including by implementing port state measures and by supporting increased monitoring and surveillance.

Environmental Goods and Services

TPP countries have worked together in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum to increase trade in environmental goods and services. The TPP includes commitments by all Parties to eliminate tariffs on environmental goods upon entry into force of the agreement, and to facilitate trade in environmental services. Under the Environment chapter, the Parties will work together to address non-tariff barriers on these products and services to further promote trade in environmental goods and services.

Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs)

TPP countries are signatories to many MEAs covering a wide range of environmental issues. However, these agreements may lack binding enforcement regimes. By requiring MEA implementation, TPP provides valuable reinforcements to these commitments. The Environment chapter requires Parties to reaffirm their commitment to implement those MEAs they have joined, effectively enforce their implementing legislation for all MEAs to which they have joined, and work together as they negotiate and implement new MEAs. The chapter highlights and reinforces the commitment to implement common MEAs of particular importance to the Asia-Pacific, including CITES, the Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting Substances and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL). Several MEAs are not common to the TPP Parties. For those MEAs dealing with marine species and conservation of wetlands, TPP includes broader, stand-alone commitments for the sustainable management of fisheries, combatting illegal fishing, promoting conservation of marine mammals, and protecting and conserving all specially protected natural areas including wetlands, but also glaciers and other fragile ecosystems. By establishing consistent, enforceable commitments that apply to all TPP Parties equally, we are advancing the basic objectives of the original MEAs and providing for similar levels of environmental protection across the region. And in several cases, TPP goes beyond any previous MEA commitments to establish pioneering new commitments, such as commitments to prohibit harmful government handouts to illegal fishermen, and to take enhanced actions to combat wildlife trafficking — regardless of whether the wildlife is protected under CITES.

Transparency

The chapter establishes expansive commitments on transparency related to the implementation and enforcement of the environment chapter, including commitments by TPP Parties to encourage full public participation in the implementation of the Environment chapter.

Access to Remedies for Environmental Harm

The chapter includes commitments by TPP Parties to ensure access to fair, equitable and transparent administrative or judicial proceedings for enforcing their environmental laws, and to provide appropriate sanctions or remedies for violations of their environmental laws.

Cooperation

Collectively, TPP countries have a wealth of knowledge and experience to share with one another on environmental and conservation issues. TPP will help take full advantage of this by establishing a framework for conducting, reviewing, and evaluating cooperative activities that support implementation of the Environment chapter, and for public participation in these activities.

Biodiversity

The TPP region includes several countries known as biodiversity ‘hot spots’ such as Peru, Vietnam, and Malaysia; and several likewise with unique and sensitive habitat, including Australia, New Zealand, and Alaska and the Canadian Arctic. TPP’s cooperative commitments will promote conservation and sustainable treatment of biodiverse areas, and recognize the importance of maintaining indigenous knowledge and practices.

Transition to a Low-Emissions Economy

TPP countries recognize that the world is in the midst of an energy revolution. The agreement includes commitments to cooperate to address issues such as energy efficiency; the development of cost-effective, green technologies; and alternative, clean and renewable energy sources.

Corporate Social Responsibility and Public-Private Partnerships

The Environment chapter includes commitments to encourage companies to voluntarily adopt corporate social responsibility policies, and to use mechanisms, such as public-private partnerships, to help to protect the environment and natural resources.

Implementation

The Environment chapter establishes a senior-level Environment Committee, which will meet regularly to oversee implementation of the chapter, with opportunities for public participation in the process.

New Features

TPP’s Environment chapter builds on previous agreements and introduces pioneering commitments in key environment areas, including:

Prohibitions on some of the most harmful fisheries subsidies, as well as enhanced transparency requirements for fisheries subsidies programs.Broad commitments to promote sustainable fisheries management, which can support measures being developed or implemented through relevant regional fisheries management organizations and other arrangements in the Asia-Pacific region; and to address illegal fishing, as well as species-specific protections for ecologically critical and iconic marine species, such as whales and sharks.Broad commitments to combat wildlife trafficking beyond CITES.

These provisions enable TPP Parties to work together to address international challenges such as wildlife trafficking and overfishing — issues which do not respect borders and require stepped-up domestic actions combined with enhanced cross-regional cooperation– more effectively than has been possible in any previous Free Trade Agreement (FTA).

Impact

As centers of biodiversity, TPP countries cover environmentally-sensitive regions from tundra to island ecosystems, and from the world’s largest coral reef to its largest rain forest. The Asia-Pacific region more broadly is also home to some of the fastest-growing markets in the world, the fastest-growing consumer of natural resources and fisheries, and a significant transit point for trade of all kinds — including illegal wildlife, timber, and fish products — from both inside and outside the region, such as elephant ivory and rhinoceros horn. In no region are challenges greater, and in no region is joint action so necessary. TPP’s Environment chapter address these challenges in detail, through improving the substance of policies, transparency of policymaking procedure, and cooperation against common threats:

Oceans

TPP countries account for more than one-quarter of global seafood trade, and four out of the top 15 global producers of fisheries products by volume. They are uniquely placed to address policies damaging to the health of the marine environment, including the subsidization of overfishing.

Forests

TPP countries also account for approximately one-quarter of global timber and pulp production. Timber-producing countries, including TPP countries, reportedly lose as much as $6 billion per year to illegal logging, including unauthorized logging in protected areas or indigenous lands, exceeding timber concession limits, removal of protected timber species and other violations of national laws.

Wildlife

Five of the TPP countries rank among the world’s top 10 most biologically diverse countries, and the Asia-Pacific region encompasses major consumer, transit and export markets for threatened and endangered wildlife. This illicit trade is a threat to the planet and, increasingly, to global security due to links to organized crime.

Compliance with MEAs

MEAs, like those protecting wildlife and plants and the marine environment from ship pollution, contain important commitments to which all TPP countries have signed up. However, these agreements may lack binding enforcement regimes.

Domestic Environmental Protection and Enforcement

The level of enforcement of domestic environmental laws addressing air pollution, water pollution, endangered species, and other environmental matters varies, and some of TPP’s lower-income members may require support to strengthen the scientific and regulatory agencies that administer and enforce these laws.

Policy Processes

In the environment as in other areas, TPP is an opportunity to address and reform opaque policymaking processes that can miss critical issues or overlook the interest of marginalized groups. In some TPP countries, scientific and environmental regulatory agencies may need capacity-building and technical assistance to fulfill their missions both for local environmental protection and for implementation of multilateral rules.

Article 20.1: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

environmental law means a statute or regulation of a Party, or provision thereof, including any that implements the Party’s obligations under a multilateral environmental agreement, the primary purpose of which is the protection of the environment, or the prevention of a danger to human life or health, through:

(a) the prevention, abatement or control of: the release, discharge or emission of pollutants or environmental contaminants;

(b) the control of environmentally hazardous or toxic chemicals, substances, materials or wastes, and the dissemination of information related thereto; or

(c) the protection or conservation of wild flora or fauna, including endangered species, their habitat, and specially protected natural areas[1], [2]

but does not include a statute or regulation, or provision thereof, directly related to worker safety or health, nor any statute or regulation, or provision thereof, the primary purpose of which is managing the subsistence or aboriginal harvesting of natural resources; and

statute or regulation means:

for Australia, an Act of the Commonwealth Parliament, or a regulation made by the Governor-General in Council under delegated authority under an Act of the Commonwealth Parliament, that is enforceable at the central level of government;

for Brunei Darussalam, an Act, Order or a Regulation promulgated pursuant to the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam, enforceable by the Government of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam;

for Canada, an Act of the Parliament of Canada or regulation made under an Act of the Parliament of Canada that is enforceable by action of the central level of government;

for Chile, a law of National Congress or decree of the President of the Republic, enacted as indicated by the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile;

for Japan, a Law of the Diet, a Cabinet Order, or a Ministerial Ordinance and other Orders established pursuant to a Law of the Diet, that is enforceable by action of the central level of government;

for Malaysia, an Act of Parliament or regulation promulgated pursuant to an Act of Parliament that is enforceable by action of the federal government;

for Mexico, an Act of Congress or regulation promulgated pursuant to an Act of Congress that is enforceable by action of the federal level of government;

for New Zealand, an Act of the Parliament of New Zealand or a regulation made under an Act of the Parliament of New Zealand by the Governor-General in Council, which is enforceable by action of the central level of government;

for Peru, a law of Congress, Decree or Resolution promulgated by the central level of government to implement a law of Congress that is enforceable by action of the central level of government;

for Singapore, an Act of the Parliament of Singapore, or a Regulation promulgated pursuant to an Act of the Parliament of Singapore, which is enforceable by action of the Government of Singapore;

for the United States, an Act of Congress or regulation promulgated pursuant to an Act of Congress that is enforceable by action of the central level of government; and

for Viet Nam, a law of the National Assembly, an ordinance of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly, or a regulation promulgated by the central level of government to implement a law of the National Assembly or an ordinance of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly that is enforceable by action of the central level of government.

Article 20.2 Objectives

1. The objectives of this Chapter are to promote mutually supportive trade and environmental policies; promote high levels of environmental protection and effective enforcement of environmental laws; and enhance the capacities of the Parties to address trade-related environmental issues, including through cooperation.

2. Taking account of their respective national priorities and circumstances, the Parties recognize that enhanced cooperation to protect and conserve the environment and sustainably manage their natural resources brings benefits that can contribute to sustainable development, strengthen their environmental governance and complement the objectives of this Agreement.

3. The Parties further recognise that it is inappropriate to establish or use their environmental laws or other measures in a manner which would constitute a disguised restriction on trade or investment between the Parties.

Article 20.3: General Commitments

1. The Parties recognise the importance of mutually supportive trade and environmental policies and practices to improve environmental protection in the furtherance of sustainable development.

2. The Parties recognise the sovereign right of each Party to establish its own levels of domestic environmental protection and its own environmental priorities, and to establish, adopt or modify its environmental laws and policies accordingly.

3. Each Party shall strive to ensure that its environmental laws and policies provide for, and encourage, high levels of environmental protection and to continue to improve its respective levels of environmental protection.

4. No Party shall fail to effectively enforce its environmental laws through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

5. The Parties recognise that each Party retains the right to exercise discretion and to make decisions regarding: (a) investigatory, prosecutorial, regulatory and compliance matters; and (b) the allocation of environmental enforcement resources with respect to other environmental laws determined to have higher priorities. Accordingly, the Parties understand that with respect to the enforcement of environmental laws a Party is in compliance with paragraph 4 if a course of action or inaction reflects a reasonable exercise of that discretion, or results from a bona fide decision regarding the allocation of those resources in accordance with priorities for enforcement of its environmental laws.

6. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by weakening or reducing the protection afforded in their respective environmental laws. Accordingly, a Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from, its environmental laws in a manner that weakens or reduces the protection afforded in those laws in order to encourage trade or investment between the Parties.

7. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to empower a Party’s authorities to undertake environmental law enforcement activities in the territory of another Party.

Article 20.4: Multilateral Environmental Agreements

1. The Parties recognise that multilateral environmental agreements to which they are party play an important role, globally and domestically, in protecting the environment and that their respective implementation of these agreements is critical to achieving the environmental objectives of these agreements. Accordingly, each Party affirms its commitment to implement the multilateral environmental agreements to which it is a party.

2. The Parties emphasise the need to enhance the mutual supportiveness between trade and environmental law and policies, through dialogue between the Parties on trade and environmental issues of mutual interest, particularly with respect to the negotiation and implementation of relevant multilateral environmental agreements and trade agreements.

Article 20.5: Protection of the Ozone Layer

1. The Parties recognise that emissions of certain substances can significantly deplete and otherwise modify the ozone layer in a manner that is likely to result in adverse effects on human health and the environment. Accordingly, each Party shall take measures to control the production and consumption of, and trade in, such substances.[3], [4], [5]

2. The Parties also recognise the importance of public participation and consultation, in accordance with their respective law or policy, in the development and implementation of measures concerning the protection of the ozone layer. Each Party shall make publicly available, appropriate information about its programmes and activities, including cooperative programmes, that are related to ozone layer protection.

3. Consistent with Article 20.12 (Cooperation Frameworks), the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of mutual interest related to ozone-depleting substances. Cooperation may include, but is not limited to exchanging information and experiences in areas related to:

(a) environmentally friendly alternatives to ozone-depleting substances;

(b) refrigerant management practices, policies and programmes;

(c) methodologies for stratospheric ozone measurements; and

(d) combating illegal trade in ozone-depleting substances.

Article 20.6: Protection of the Marine Environment from Ship Pollution

1. The Parties recognise the importance of protecting and preserving the marine environment. To that end, each Party shall take measures to prevent the pollution of the marine environment from ships.[6], [7], [8]

2. The Parties also recognise the importance of public participation and consultation, in accordance with their respective law or policy, in the development and implementation of measures to prevent the pollution of the marine environment from ships. Each Party shall make publicly available appropriate information about its programmes and activities, including cooperative programmes, that are related to the prevention of pollution of the marine environment from ships.

3. Consistent with Article 20.12 (Cooperation Frameworks), the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of mutual interest with respect to pollution of the marine environment from ships. Areas of cooperation may include:

(a) accidental pollution from ships;

(b) pollution from routine operations of ships;

(c) deliberate pollution from ships;

(d) development of technologies to minimize ship-generated waste;

(e) emissions from ships;

(f) adequacy of port waste reception facilities;

(g) increased protection in special geographic areas; and

(h) enforcement measures including notifications to flag States and, as appropriate, by port States.

Article 20.7: Procedural Matters

1. Each Party shall promote public awareness of its environmental laws and policies, including enforcement and compliance procedures, by ensuring that relevant information is available to the public.

2. Each Party shall ensure that an interested person residing or established in its territory may request that the Party’s competent authorities investigate alleged violations of its environmental laws, and that the competent authorities give those requests due consideration, in accordance with the Party’s law.

3. Each Party shall ensure that judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative proceedings for the enforcement of its environmental laws are available under its law and that those proceedings are fair, equitable, transparent and comply with due process of law. Any hearings in these proceedings shall be open to the public, except when the administration of justice otherwise requires, and in accordance with its applicable laws.

4. Each Party shall ensure that persons with a recognised interest under its law in a particular matter have appropriate access to proceedings referred to in paragraph 3.

5. Each Party shall provide appropriate sanctions or remedies for violations of its environmental laws for the effective enforcement of those laws. Those sanctions or remedies may include a right to bring an action directly against the violator to seek damages or injunctive relief, or a right to seek governmental action.

6. Each Party shall ensure that it takes appropriate account of relevant factors in the establishment of the sanctions or remedies referred to in paragraph 5. Those factors may include the nature and gravity of the violation, damage to the environment and any economic benefit the violator derived from the violation.

Article 20.8: Opportunities for Public Participation

1. Each Party shall seek to accommodate requests for information regarding the Party’s implementation of this Chapter.

2. Each Party shall make use of existing, or establish new, consultative mechanisms, for example national advisory committees, to seek views on matters related to the implementation of this Chapter. These mechanisms may include persons with relevant experience, as appropriate, including experience in business, natural resource conservation and management, or other environmental matters.

Article 20.9: Public Submissions

1. Each Party shall provide for the receipt and consideration of written submissions from persons of that Party regarding its implementation of this Chapter.[9] Each Party shall respond in a timely manner to such submissions in writing and in accordance with domestic procedures, and make the submissions and its responses available to the public, for example by posting on an appropriate public website.

2. Each Party shall make its procedures for the receipt and consideration of written submissions readily accessible and publicly available, for example by posting on an appropriate public website. These procedures may provide that to be eligible for consideration the submission should:

(a) be in writing in one of the official languages of the Party receiving the submission;

(b) clearly identify the person making the submission;

(c) provide sufficient information to allow for the review of the submission including any documentary evidence on which the submission may be based;

(d) explain how, and to what extent, the issue raised affects trade or investment between the Parties;

(e) not raise issues that are the subject of ongoing judicial or administrative proceedings; and

(f) indicate whether the matter has been communicated in writing to the relevant authorities of the Party and the Party’s response, if any.

3. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of the entity or entities responsible for receiving and responding to any written submissions referred to in paragraph 1 within 180 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

4. If a submission asserts that a Party is failing to effectively enforce its environmental laws and following the written response to the submission by that Party, any other Party may request that the Committee on Environment (Committee) discuss that submission and written response with a view to further understanding the matter raised in the submission and, as appropriate, to consider whether the matter could benefit from cooperative activities.

5. At its first meeting, the Committee shall establish procedures for discussing submissions and responses that are referred to it by a Party. These procedures may provide for the use of experts or existing institutional bodies to develop a report for the Committee comprised of information based on facts relevant to the matter.

6. No later than three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as decided by the Parties, the Committee shall prepare a written report for the Commission on the implementation of this Article. For the purposes of preparing this report, each Party shall provide a written summary regarding its implementation activities under this Article.

Article 20.10: Corporate Social Responsibility

Each Party should encourage enterprises operating within its territory or jurisdiction, to adopt voluntarily, into their policies and practices, principles of corporate social responsibility that are related to the environment, consistent with internationally recognised standards and guidelines that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party.

Article 20.11: Voluntary Mechanisms to Enhance Environmental Performance

1. The Parties recognise that flexible, voluntary mechanisms, for example, voluntary auditing and reporting, market-based incentives, voluntary sharing of information and expertise, and public-private partnerships, can contribute to the achievement and maintenance of high levels of environmental protection and complement domestic regulatory measures. The Parties also recognise that those mechanisms should be designed in a manner that maximises their environmental benefits and avoids the creation of unnecessary barriers to trade.

2. Therefore, in accordance with its laws, regulations or policies and to the extent it considers appropriate, each Party shall encourage:

(a) the use of flexible and voluntary mechanisms to protect natural resources and the environment in its territory; and

(b) its relevant authorities, businesses and business organisations, non-governmental organisations and other interested persons involved in the development of criteria used to evaluate environmental performance, with respect to these voluntary mechanisms, to continue to develop and improve such criteria.

3. Further, if private sector entities or non-governmental organisations develop voluntary mechanisms for the promotion of products based on their environmental qualities, each Party should encourage those entities and organisations to develop voluntary mechanisms that, among other things:

(a) are truthful, are not misleading and take into account scientific and technical information;

(b) if applicable and available, are based on relevant international standards, recommendations or guidelines, and best practices;

(c) promote competition and innovation; and

(d) do not treat a product less favourably on the basis of origin.

Article 20.12: Cooperation Frameworks

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation as a mechanism to implement this Chapter, to enhance its benefits and to strengthen the Parties’ joint and individual capacities to protect the environment and to promote sustainable development as they strengthen their trade and investment relations.

2. Taking account of their national priorities and circumstances, and available resources, the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of joint or common interest among the participating Parties related to the implementation of this Chapter, when there is mutual benefit from that cooperation. This cooperation may be carried out on a bilateral or plurilateral basis between Parties and, subject to consensus by the participating Parties, may include non-governmental bodies or organisations and non-Parties to this Agreement.

3. Each Party shall designate the authority or authorities responsible for cooperation related to the implementation of this Chapter to serve as its national contact point on matters that relate to coordination of cooperation activities and shall notify the other Parties in writing within 90 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party of its contact point. On notifying the other Parties of its contact point, or at any time thereafter through the contact points, a Party may:

(a) share its priorities for cooperation with the other Parties, including the objectives of that cooperation; and

(b) propose cooperation activities related to the implementation of this Chapter to another Party or Parties.

4. When possible and appropriate, the Parties shall seek to complement and use their existing cooperation mechanisms and take into account relevant work of regional and international organisations.

5. Cooperation may be undertaken through various means including: dialogues, workshops, seminars, conferences, collaborative programmes and projects; technical assistance to promote and facilitate cooperation and training; the sharing of best practices on policies and procedures; and the exchange of experts.

6. In developing cooperative activities and programmes, a Party shall, if relevant, identify performance measures and indicators to assist in examining and evaluating the efficiency, effectiveness and progress of specific cooperative activities and programmes and share those measures and indicators, as well as the outcome of any evaluation during or following the completion of a cooperative activity or programme, with the other Parties.

7. The Parties, through their contact points for cooperation, shall periodically review the implementation and operation of this Article and report their findings, which may include recommendations, to the Committee to inform its review under Article 20.19(3)(c) (Environment Committee and Contact Points). The Parties, through the Committee, may periodically evaluate the necessity of designating an entity to provide administrative and operational support for cooperative activities. If the Parties decide to establish such an entity, the Parties shall agree on the funding of the entity, on a voluntary basis to support the entity’s operation.

8. Each Party shall promote public participation in the development and implementation of cooperative activities, as appropriate. This may include activities such as encouraging and facilitating direct contacts and cooperation among relevant entities and the conclusion of arrangements among them for the conduct of cooperative activities under this Chapter.

9. Where a Party has defined the environmental laws under Article 20.1 to include only laws at the central level of government (first Party), and where another Party (second Party) considers that an environmental law at the sub-central level of government of the first Party is not being effectively enforced by the relevant sub-central government through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties, the second Party may request a dialogue with the first Party. The request shall contain information that is specific and sufficient to enable the first Party to evaluate the matter at issue and an indication of how the matter is negatively affecting trade or investment of the second Party.

10. All cooperative activities under this Chapter are subject to the availability of funds and of human and other resources, and to the applicable laws and regulations of the participating Parties. The participating Parties shall decide, on a case-by-case basis, the funding of cooperative activities.

Article 20.13: Trade and Biodiversity

1. The Parties recognise the importance of conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and their key role in achieving sustainable development.

2. Accordingly, each Party shall promote and encourage the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, in accordance with its law or policy.

3. The Parties recognise the importance of respecting, preserving and maintaining knowledge and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.

4. The Parties recognise the importance of facilitating access to genetic resources within their respective national jurisdictions, consistent with each Party’s international obligations. The Parties further recognise that some Parties require, through national measures, prior informed consent to access such genetic resources in accordance with national measures and, where such access is granted, the establishment of mutually agreed terms, including with respect to sharing of benefits from the use of such genetic resources, between users and providers.

5. The Parties also recognise the importance of public participation and consultation, in accordance with their respective law or policy, in the development and implementation of measures concerning the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. Each Party shall make publicly available information about its programmes and activities, including cooperative programmes, related to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.

6. Consistent with Article 20.12 (Cooperation Frameworks), the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of mutual interest. Cooperation may include, but is not limited to, exchanging information and experiences in areas related to:

(a) the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity;

(b) the protection and maintenance of ecosystems and ecosystem services; and

(c) access to genetic resources and the sharing of benefits arising from their utilization.

Article 20.14: Invasive Alien Species

1. The Parties recognise that the movement of terrestrial and aquatic invasive alien species across borders through trade-related pathways can adversely affect the environment, economic activities and development, and human health. The Parties also recognise that the prevention, detection, control and, when possible, eradication, of invasive alien species are critical strategies for managing those adverse impacts.

2. Accordingly, the Committee shall coordinate with the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures established under Article 7.5 (Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) to identify cooperative opportunities to share information and management experiences on the movement, prevention, detection, control and eradication of invasive alien species, with a view to enhancing efforts to assess and address the risks and adverse impacts of invasive alien species.

Article 20.15: Transition to a Low Emissions and Resilient Economy

1. The Parties acknowledge that transition to a low emissions economy requires collective action.

2. The Parties recognise that each Party’s actions to transition to a low emissions economy should reflect domestic circumstances and capabilities and, consistent with Article 20.12 (Cooperative Frameworks), Parties shall cooperate to address matters of joint or common interest. Areas of cooperation may include, but are not limited to: energy efficiency; development of cost-effective, low-emissions technologies and alternative, clean and renewable energy sources; sustainable transport and sustainable urban infrastructure development; addressing deforestation and forest degradation; emissions monitoring; market and non-market mechanisms; low-emissions, resilient development and sharing of information and experiences in addressing this issue. Further, the Parties shall, as appropriate, engage in cooperative and capacity-building activities related to transitioning to a low emissions economy.

Article 20.16: Marine Capture Fisheries[10]

1. The Parties acknowledge their role as major consumers, producers and traders of fisheries products and the importance of the marine fisheries sector to their development and to the livelihoods of their fishing communities, including artisanal or small-scale fisheries. The Parties also acknowledge that the fate of marine capture fisheries is an urgent resource problem facing the international community. Accordingly, the Parties recognise the importance of taking measures aimed at the conservation and the sustainable management of fisheries.

2. In this regard, the Parties acknowledge that inadequate fisheries management, fisheries subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity, and illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing[11] can have significant negative impacts on trade, development and the environment and recognise the need for individual and collective action to address the problems of overfishing and unsustainable utilisation of fisheries resources.

3. Accordingly, each Party shall seek to operate a fisheries management system that regulates marine wild capture fishing and that is designed to:

(a) prevent overfishing and overcapacity;

(b) reduce bycatch of non-target species and juveniles, including through the regulation of fishing gear that results in bycatch and the regulation of fishing in areas where bycatch is likely to occur; and

(c) promote the recovery of overfished stocks for all marine fisheries in which that Party’s persons conduct fishing activities.

Such a management system shall be based on the best scientific evidence available and on internationally recognised best practices for fisheries management and conservation as reflected in the relevant provisions of international instruments aimed at ensuring the sustainable use and conservation of marine species.[12]

4. Each Party shall promote the long-term conservation of sharks, marine turtles, seabirds, and marine mammals, through the implementation and effective enforcement of conservation and management measures. Such measures should include, as appropriate:

(a) for sharks: the collection of species specific data, fisheries bycatch mitigation measures, catch limits, and finning prohibitions;

(b) for marine turtles, seabirds, and marine mammals: fisheries bycatch mitigation measures, conservation and relevant management measures, prohibitions, and other measures in accordance with relevant international agreements to which the Party is party.

5. The Parties recognise that the implementation of a fisheries management system that is designed to prevent overfishing and overcapacity and to promote the recovery of overfished stocks must include the control, reduction and eventual elimination of all subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity. To that end, no Party shall grant or maintain any of the following subsidies[13] within the meaning of Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement that are specific within the meaning of Article 2 of the SCM Agreement:

(a) subsidies for fishing[14] that negatively affect[15] fish stocks that are in an overfished[16] condition; and

(b) subsidies provided to any fishing vessel[17] while listed by the flag State or a relevant Regional Fisheries Management Organisation or Arrangement for IUU fishing in accordance with the rules and procedures of that organisation or arrangement and in conformity with international law.

6. Subsidy programmes that are established by a Party before the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party and which are inconsistent with paragraph 5(a) shall be brought into conformity with that paragraph as soon as possible and no later than three years[18] of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party.

7. In relation to subsidies that are not prohibited by paragraph 5 (a) or (b), and taking into consideration a Party’s social and developmental priorities, including food security concerns, each Party shall make best efforts to refrain from introducing new, or extending or enhancing existing, subsidies within the meaning of Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement, to the extent they are specific within the meaning of Article 2 of the SCM Agreement, that contribute to overfishing or overcapacity.

8. With a view to achieving the objective of eliminating subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity, the Parties shall review the disciplines in paragraph 5 at regular meetings of the Committee.

9. Each Party shall notify the other Parties, within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it and every two years thereafter, of any subsidy within the meaning of Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement that is specific within the meaning of Article 2 of the SCM Agreement, that the Party grants or maintains to persons engaged in fishing or fishing related activities.

10. These notifications shall cover subsidies provided within the previous two-year period and shall include the information required under Article 25.3 of the SCM Agreement and, to the extent possible, the following information:[19]

(a) programme name;

(b) legal authority for the programme;

(c) catch data by species in the fishery for which the subsidy is provided;

(d) status of the fish stocks in the fishery for which the subsidy is provided (for example, overexploited, depleted, fully exploited, recovering or underexploited);

(e) fleet capacity in the fishery for which the subsidy is provided;

(f) conservation and management measures in place for the relevant fish stock; and

(g) total imports and exports per species.

11. Each Party shall also provide, to the extent possible, information in relation to other fisheries subsidies that the Party grants or maintains that are not covered by paragraph 5, in particular fuel subsidies.

12. A Party may request additional information from the notifying Party regarding the notifications under paragraphs 9 and 10. The notifying Party shall respond to that request as quickly as possible and in a comprehensive manner.

13. The Parties recognise the importance of concerted international action to address IUU fishing as reflected in regional and international instruments[20] and shall endeavour to improve cooperation internationally in this regard, including with and through competent international organisations.

14. In support of efforts to combat IUU fishing practices and to help deter trade in products from species harvested from those practices, each Party shall:

(a) cooperate with other Parties to identify needs and to build capacity to support the implementation of this Article;

(b) support monitoring, control, surveillance, compliance and enforcement systems, including by adopting, reviewing, or revising, as appropriate measures to:

(i) deter vessels that are flying its flag and its nationals from engaging in IUU fishing activities; and

(ii) address the transhipment at sea of fish or fish products caught through IUU fishing activities;

(c) implement port State measures;

(d) strive to act consistently with relevant conservation and management measures adopted by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations of which it is not a member so as not to undermine those measures; and

(e) endeavour not to undermine catch or trade documentation schemes operated by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations or Arrangements or an intergovernmental organisation whose scope includes the management of shared fisheries resources, including straddling and highly migratory species, where that Party is not a member of those organisations or arrangements.

15. Consistent with Article 26.2.2 (Publication), a Party shall, to the extent possible, provide other Parties the opportunity to comment on proposed measures that are designed to prevent trade in fisheries products that results from IUU fishing.

Article 20.17: Conservation and Trade

1. The Parties affirm the importance of combating the illegal take[21] of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, and acknowledge that this trade undermines efforts to conserve and sustainably manage those natural resources, has social consequences, distorts legal trade in wild fauna and flora, and reduces the economic and environmental value of these natural resources.

2. Accordingly, each Party shall adopt, maintain and implement laws, regulations and any other measures to fulfill its obligations under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).[22], [23], [24]

3. The Parties commit to promote conservation and to combat the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora.To that end, the Parties shall:

(a) exchange information and experiences on issues of mutual interest related to combating the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, including combating illegal logging and associated illegal trade, and promoting the legal trade in associated products;

(b) undertake, as appropriate, joint activities on conservation issues of mutual interest, including through relevant regional and international fora; and

(c) endeavour to implement, as appropriate, CITES resolutions that aim to protect and conserve species whose survival is threatened by international trade.

4. Each Party further commits to:

(a) take appropriate measures to protect and conserve wild fauna and flora that it has identified to be at risk within its territory, including measures to conserve the ecological integrity of specially protected natural areas, for example wetlands;

(b) maintain or strengthen government capacity and institutional frameworks to promote sustainable forest management and wild fauna and flora conservation, and endeavour to enhance public participation and transparency in these institutional frameworks; and

(c) endeavour to develop and strengthen cooperation and consultation with interested non-governmental entities in order to enhance implementation of measures to combat the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora.

5. In a further effort to address the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, including parts and products thereof, each Party shall take measures to combat, and cooperate to prevent, the trade of wild fauna and flora that, based on credible evidence[25], were taken or traded in violation of that Party’s law or another applicable law[26], the primary purpose of which is to conserve, protect, or manage wild fauna or flora. Such measures shall include sanctions, penalties, or other effective measures, including administrative measures, that can act as a deterrent to such trade. In addition, each Party shall endeavour to take measures to combat the trade of wild fauna and flora transhipped through its territory that, based on credible evidence, were illegally taken or traded.

6. The Parties recognise that each Party retains the right to exercise administrative, investigatory and enforcement discretion in its implementation of paragraph 5, including by taking into account in relation to each situation the strength of the available evidence and the seriousness of the suspected violation. In addition, the Parties recognise that in implementing paragraph 5, each Party retains the right to make decisions regarding the allocation of administrative, investigatory and enforcement resources.

7. In order to promote the widest measure of law enforcement cooperation and information sharing between the Parties to combat the illegal take of, and illegal trade in, wild fauna and flora, the Parties shall endeavour to identify opportunities, consistent with their respective law and in accordance with applicable international agreements, to enhance law enforcement cooperation and information sharing, for example by creating and participating in law enforcement networks.

Article 20.18: Environmental Goods and Services

1. The Parties recognise the importance of trade and investment in environmental goods and services as a means of improving environmental and economic performance and addressing global environmental challenges.

2. The Parties further recognise the importance of this Agreement to promoting trade and investment in environmental goods and services in the free trade area.

3. Accordingly, the Committee shall consider issues identified by a Party or Parties related to trade in environmental goods and services, including issues identified as potential non-tariff barriers to that trade. The Parties shall endeavour to address any potential barriers to trade in environmental goods and services that may be identified by a Party, including by working through the Committee and in conjunction with other relevant committees established under this Agreement, as appropriate.

4. The Parties may develop bilateral and plurilateral cooperative projects on environmental goods and services to address current and future global trade-related environmental challenges.

Article 20.19: Environment Committee and Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point from its relevant authorities within 90 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it, in order to facilitate communication between the Parties in the implementation of this Chapter. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Parties in the event of any change to its contact point.

2. The Parties establish an Environment Committee (“Committee”) composed of senior government representatives, or their designees, of the relevant trade and environment national authorities of each Party responsible for the implementation of this Chapter.

3. The purpose of the Committee is to oversee the implementation of this Chapter and its functions shall be to:

(a) provide a forum to discuss and review the implementation of this Chapter;

(b) provide periodic reports to the Commission regarding the implementation of this Chapter;

(c) provide a forum to discuss and review cooperative activities under this Chapter;

(d) consider and endeavour to resolve matters referred to it under Article 20.21 (Senior Representative Consultations);

(e) coordinate with other committees established under this Agreement as appropriate; and

(f) perform any other functions as the Parties may decide.

4. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Thereafter, the Committee shall meet every two years unless the Committee agrees otherwise. The Chair of the Committee and the venue of its meetings shall rotate among each of the Parties in English alphabetical order, unless the Committee agrees otherwise.

5. All decisions and reports of the Committee shall be made by consensus, unless the Committee agrees otherwise or unless otherwise provided in this Chapter.

6. All decisions and reports of the Committee shall be made available to the public, unless the Committee agrees otherwise.

7. During the fifth year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Committee shall:

(a) review the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) report its findings, which may include recommendations, to the Parties and the Commission; and

(c) undertake subsequent reviews at intervals to be decided by the Parties.

8. The Committee shall provide for public input on matters relevant to the Committee’s work, as appropriate, and shall hold a public session at each meeting.

9. The Parties recognise the importance of resource efficiency in the implementation of this Chapter and the desirability of using new technologies to facilitate communication and interaction between the Parties and with the public.

Article 20.20: Environment Consultations

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this Chapter, and shall make every effort through dialogue, consultation, exchange of information and, if appropriate, cooperation to address any matter that might affect the operation of this Chapter.

2. A Party (the requesting Party) may request consultations with any other Party (the responding Party) regarding any matter arising under this Chapter by delivering a written request to the responding Party’s contact point. The requesting Party shall include information that is specific and sufficient to enable the responding Party to respond, including identification of the matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the request. The requesting Party shall circulate its request for consultations to the other Parties through their respective contact points.

3. A Party other than the requesting or the responding Party that considers it has a substantial interest in the matter (a participating Party) may participate in the consultations by delivering a written notice to the contact point of the requesting and responding Parties no later than seven days after the date of circulation of the request for consultations. The participating Party shall include in its notice an explanation of its substantial interest in the matter.

4. Unless the requesting and the responding Parties (the consulting Parties) agree otherwise, the consulting Parties shall enter into consultations promptly, and no later than 30 days after the date of receipt by the responding Party of the request.

5. The consulting Parties shall make every effort to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution to the matter, which may include appropriate cooperative activities. The consulting Parties may seek advice or assistance from any person or body they deem appropriate in order to examine the matter.

Article 20.21: Senior Representative Consultations

1. If the consulting Parties have failed to resolve the matter under Article 20.20 (Environment Consultations), a consulting Party may request that the Committee representatives from the consulting Parties convene to consider the matter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other consulting Party or Parties. At the same time, the consulting Party making the request shall circulate the request to the contact points of other Parties.

2. The Committee representatives from the consulting Parties shall promptly convene following the delivery of the request, and shall seek to resolve the matter including, if appropriate, by gathering relevant scientific and technical information from governmental or non-governmental experts. Committee representatives from any other Party that considers it has a substantial interest in the matter may participate in the consultations.

Article 20.22: Ministerial Consultations

1. If the consulting Parties have failed to resolve the matter under Article 20.21 (Senior Representative Consultations), a consulting Party may refer the matter to the relevant Ministers of the consulting Parties who shall seek to resolve the matter.

2. Consultations pursuant to Article 20.20 (Environmental Consultations), Article 20.21 (Senior Representative Consultations) and this Article may be held in person or by any technological means available as agreed by the consulting Parties. If in person, consultations shall be held in the capital of the responding Party, unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise.

3. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of any Party in any future proceedings.

Article 20.23: Dispute Resolution

1. If the consulting Parties have failed to resolve the matter under Article 20.20 (Environmental Consultations), Article 20.21 (Senior Representative Consultations) and Article 20.22 (Ministerial Consultations) within 60 days after the date of receipt of a request under Article 20.20 (Environmental Consultations), or any other period as the consulting Parties may agree, the requesting Party may request consultations under Article 28.5 (Consultations) or request the establishment of a panel under Article 28.7 (Establishment of a Panel).

2. Notwithstanding Article 28.14 (Role of Experts), in a dispute arising under Article 20.17.2 (Conservation and Trade) a panel convened under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall:

(a) seek technical advice or assistance, if appropriate, from an entity authorised under CITES to address the particular matter, and provide the consulting Parties with an opportunity to comment on any such technical advice or assistance received; and

(b) provide due consideration to any interpretive guidance received pursuant to subparagraph (a) on the matter to the extent appropriate in light of its nature and status in making its findings and determinations under Article 28.17.4 (Initial Report).

3. Before a Party initiates dispute settlement under this Agreement for a matter arising under Article 20.3.4 or Article 20.3.6 (General Commitments), that Party shall consider whether it maintains environmental laws that are substantially equivalent in scope to the environmental laws that would be the subject of the dispute.

4. If a Party requests consultations with another Party under Article 20.20 (Environment Consultations) for a matter arising under Article 20.3.4 or Article 20.3.6 (General Commitments), and the responding Party considers that the requesting Party does not maintain environmental laws that are substantially equivalent in scope to the environmental laws that would be the subject of the dispute, the Parties shall discuss the issue during the consultations.

Annex 20-A

For Australia, the Ozone Protection and Synthetic Greenhouse Gas Management Act 1989.

For Brunei Darussalam, the Customs (Prohibition and Restriction on Imports and Exports), Order.

For Canada, the Ozone-depleting Substances Regulations, 1998 of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA).

For Chile, Supreme Decree N° 238 (1990) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Law N° 20.096.

For Japan, the Law concerning the Protection of the Ozone Layer through the Control of Specified Substances and Other Measures (Law No. 53, 1988).

For Malaysia, the Environmental Quality Act 1974

For Mexico, the General Law on Ecological Equilibrium and Environmental Protection (Ley General del Equilibrio Ecológico y la Protección al Ambiente — LGEEPA), under Title IV Environmental Protection, Chapter I and II regarding federal enforcement of atmospheric provisions.

For New Zealand, the Ozone Layer Protection Act 1996.

For Peru, the Supreme Decree No. 033–2000-ITINCI.

For Singapore, the Environmental Protection and Management Act, including regulations made thereunder.

For the United States, 42 U.S.C §§ 7671–7671q (Stratospheric Ozone Protection).

For Viet Nam, the Law on Environmental Protection 2014; the Joint Circular No. 47/2011/TTLT-BCT-BTNMT dated 30 December 2011 of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, regulating the management of import, export and temporary import for re-export of ODS according to Montreal protocol; the Decision No. 15/2006/QĐ-BTNMT dated 08 September 2006 of the Minister of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment , issuing list of refrigeration equipments using CFC prohibited for import.

Annex 20-B

For Australia, the Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Act 1983 and the Navigation Act 2012.

For Brunei Darussalam, the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea Order 2005 ; the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea (Oil) Regulations 2008; and the Prevention of the Pollution of the Seas (Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk) Regulations, 2008.

For Canada, the Canada Shipping Act, 2001 and its related regulations.

For Chile, the Decree N°1.689 (1995) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

For Japan, the Law Relating to the Prevention of Marine Pollution and Maritime Disasters (Law No. 136, 1970).

For Malaysia, the Act 515 Merchant Shipping (Oil Pollution) Act 1994; Merchant Shipping Ordinance 1952 (amended in 2007 by Act A1316); and the Environmental Quality Act 1974.

For Mexico, the Section 132 of the General Law on Ecological Equilibrium and Environmental Protection (Ley General del Equilibrio Ecológico y la Protección al Ambiente — LGEEPA).

For New Zealand, the Maritime Transport Act 1994.

For Peru, the Decree Law No. 22703; and the 1978 Protocol by Decree Law No. 22954 (March 26, 1980).

For Singapore, the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea Act, including regulations made thereunder.

For the United States, the Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships, 33 U.S.C §§ 1901–1915.

For Viet Nam, the Law on Environmental Protection 2014; the Maritime Code 2005; the Circular 50/2012/TT-BGTVT dated 19 December 2012 of the Ministry of Transport, regulating the management of receiving and processing oil-containing liquid waste from sea vessels at Viet Nam’s sea ports; the National Technical Regulation on Marine Pollution Prevention Systems of Ships QCVN 26: 2014/BGTVT.

[1] For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “specially protected natural areas” means those areas as defined by the Party in its legislation.

[2] The Parties recognize that such protection or conservation may include the protection or conservation of biological diversity.

[3] For greater certainty, for each Party, this provision pertains to substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, done at Montreal, 16 September 1987 (Montreal Protocol), including any future amendments thereto, as applicable to it.

[4] A Party shall be deemed in compliance with this provision if it maintains the measure or measures listed in Annex 20-A implementing its obligations under the Montreal Protocol or any subsequent measure or measures that provide an equivalent or higher level of environmental protection as the measure or measures listed.

[5] If compliance with this provision is not established pursuant to footnote 4, to establish a violation of this provision, a Party must demonstrate that the other Party has failed to take measures to control the production and consumption of, and trade in, certain substances that can significantly deplete and otherwise modify the ozone layer in a manner that is likely to result in adverse effects on human health and the environment, in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.

[6] For greater certainty, for each Party, this provision pertains to pollution regulated by the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, done at London, 2 November 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, done at London, 17 February 1978, and the Protocol of 1997 to Amend the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 as Modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, done at London, 26 September 1997 (MARPOL), including any future amendments thereto, as applicable to it.

[7] A Party shall be deemed in compliance with this provision if it maintains the measure or measures listed in Annex 20-B implementing its obligations under MARPOL, or any subsequent measure or measures that provide an equivalent or higher level of environmental protection as the measure or measures listed.

[8] If compliance with this provision is not established pursuant to footnote 7, to establish a violation of this provision, a Party must demonstrate that the other Party has failed to take measures to prevent the pollution of the marine environment from ships in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.

[9] If available and appropriate, a Party may use an existing institutional body or mechanism for this purpose.

[10] For greater certainty, this Article does not apply with respect to aquaculture.

[11] The term “illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing” is to be understood to have the same meaning as paragraph 3 of the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (2001 IUU Fishing Plan of Action) of the UN Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), adopted in Rome, 2001.

[12] These instruments include, among others, and as they may apply, UNCLOS, the United Nations Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, done at New York, 4 December 1995 (UN Fish Stocks Agreement), the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, the 1993 FAO Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, (Compliance Agreement) done at Rome, 24 November 1993 and the 2001 IUU Fishing Plan of Action.

[13] For the purposes of this Article, a subsidy shall be attributable to the Party conferring it, regardless of the flag of the vessel involved or the application of rules of origin to the fish involved.

[14] For the purposes of this paragraph, “fishing” means searching for, attracting, locating, catching, taking or harvesting fish or any activity which can reasonably be expected to result in the attracting, locating, catching, taking or harvesting of fish.

[15] The negative effect of such subsidies shall be determined based on the best scientific evidence available.

[16] For the purposes of this Article, a fish stock is overfished if the stock is at such a low level that mortality from fishing needs to be restricted to allow the stock to rebuild to a level that produces maximum sustainable yield or alternative reference points based on the best scientific evidence available. Fish stocks that are recognised as overfished by the national jurisdiction where the fishing is taking place or by a relevant Regional Fisheries Management Organisation shall also be considered overfished for the purposes of this paragraph.

[17] The term “fishing vessels” refers to any vessel, ship or other type of boat used for, equipped to be used for, or intended to be used for fishing or fishing related activities.

[18] Notwithstanding this paragraph, and solely for the purpose of completing a stock assessment that it has already initiated, Viet Nam may request an extension of two additional years to bring any subsidy programmes into conformity with Article 20.16.5(a) by providing a written request to the Committee no later than six months before the expiry of the three-year period provided for in this paragraph. Viet Nam’s request shall include the reason for the requested extension and the information about its subsidy programmes as provided for in Article 20.16.10. Viet Nam may avail itself of this one-time extension upon providing a request in accordance with this paragraph unless the Committee decides otherwise within 60 days of receiving the request. No later than the date on which the additional two-year period expires, Viet Nam shall provide to the Committee in writing a report on the measures it has taken to fulfill its obligation under Article 20.16.5(a).

[19] Sharing information and data on existing fisheries subsidy programmes does not prejudge their legal status, effects or nature under the GATT 1994 or the SCM Agreement and is intended to complement WTO data reporting requirements.

[20] Regional and international instruments include, among others, and as they may apply, the 2001 IUU Fishing Plan of Action, the 2005 Rome Declaration on IUU Fishing, done at Rome on 12 March 2005, the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, done at Rome, 22 November 2009, as well as instruments establishing and adopted by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations, which are defined as intergovernmental fisheries organisations or arrangements, as appropriate, that have the competence to establish conservation and management measures.

[21] The term “take” means captured, killed or collected and with respect to a plant, also means harvested, cut, logged or removed.

[22] For the purposes of this Article, a Party’s CITES obligations include existing and future amendments to which it is a Party and any existing and future reservations, exemptions, and exceptions applicable to it.

[23] To establish a violation of this paragraph, a Party must demonstrate that the other Party has failed to adopt, maintain or implement laws, regulations or other measures to fulfill its obligations under CITES in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.

[24] If a Party considers that another Party is failing to comply with its obligations under this paragraph, it shall endeavor, in the first instance, to address the matter through a consultative or other procedure under CITES.

[25] For greater certainty, for the purposes of this paragraph, each Party retains the right to determine what constitutes “credible evidence.”

[26] For greater certainty, “another applicable law” means a law of the jurisdiction where the take or trade occurred and is only relevant to the question of whether the wild fauna and flora has been taken or traded in violation of that law.


*************** Chapter 21 ***************

--- Cooperation and Business Facilitation ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/2ff9e401cd6d)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

T PP includes some of the most ambitious commitments ever reflected in a trade agreement. It will also join together countries of differing levels of development, some of which have never undertaken high-standard trade commitments. The Cooperation and Capacity Building chapter will help ensure that all of our partners can fulfill their obligations, draw their maximum potential benefit from the agreement, and emerge as strong and sustainable markets for U.S. exports of goods and services. It does not establish an assistance program, but rather creates a framework to identify needs and resources for capacity building assistance, on a voluntary basis, to ensure full implementation of the TPP Agreement and to maximize its benefits

Overview

Promoting Cooperation and Capacity Building

The Cooperation and Capacity Building chapter recognizes the value of cooperation and capacity building activities, as mutually agreed between two or more Parties, in helping all Parties to fully implement the TPP Agreement.

Procedures for Cooperation and Capacity Building

The chapter establishes a Committee on Cooperation and Capacity Building to identify and review areas for potential cooperative or capacity building efforts, on a voluntary basis and subject to the availability of resources. This Committee will facilitate exchange of information and identify contact points to help with requests related to cooperation and capacity building.

New Features

The United States and other developed TPP countries have been providing technical assistance and trade capacity building during the negotiations, and intend to provide ongoing support to developing country participants during the implementation phase as well. While previous agreements have included capacity-building programs, TPP is the first U.S. agreement to create a formal and permanent framework of cooperation to build the capacity needed in developing countries to fully implement a high-standard agreement. This is especially important as the TPP will be the largest and most diverse Free Trade Agreement the United States has ever negotiated.

Impact

TPP includes a broad range of commitments, covering tariff reductions, trade facilitation, non-tariff barriers, investment, agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary standards, intellectual property rights, cross-border services trade, labor standards, environmental standards, disciplines on State-Owned Enterprises and a framework for trade related to the digital economy. Realizing these benefits, however, depends not merely on negotiating the commitments, but on fully implementing them.

Especially for TPP’s lower-income members, this will require significant effort. Given scarce resources, it is important to ensure that capacity building resources are used as efficiently and effectively as possible. Over time, coordinated approaches to capacity-building will conserve resources while deepening cooperative relationships among TPP technical experts, reinforcing our efforts to expand high-standard rules across TPP.

Article 21.1: General Provisions

1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of cooperation and capacity building activities and shall undertake and strengthen these activities to assist in implementing this Agreement and enhancing its benefits, which are intended to accelerate economic growth and development.

2. The Parties recognise that cooperation and capacity building activities may be undertaken between two or more Parties, on a mutually agreed basis, and shall seek to complement and build on existing agreements or arrangements between them.

3. The Parties also recognise that the involvement of the private sector is important in these activities, and that SMEs may require assistance in participating in global markets.

Article 21.2: Areas of Cooperation and Capacity Building

1. The Parties may undertake and strengthen cooperation and capacity building activities to assist in:

(a) implementing the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) enhancing each Party’s ability to take advantage of the economic opportunities created by this Agreement; and

(c) promoting and facilitating trade and investment of the Parties.

2. Cooperation and capacity building activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following areas:

(a) agricultural, industrial and services sectors;

(b) promotion of education, culture and gender equality; and

(c) disaster risk management.

3. The Parties recognise that technology and innovation provides added value to cooperation and capacity building activities, and may be incorporated into cooperation and capacity building activities under this Article.

4. The Parties may undertake cooperation and capacity building activities through modes such as: dialogue, workshops, seminars, conferences, collaborative programmes and projects; technical assistance to promote and facilitate capacity building and training; the sharing of best practices on policies and procedures; and the exchange of experts, information and technology.

Article 21.3: Contact Points for Cooperation and Capacity Building

1. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point on matters relating to the coordination of cooperation and capacity building activities in accordance with Article 27.5 (Contact Points).

2. A Party may make a request for cooperation and capacity building activities related to this Agreement to another Party or Parties through the contact points.

Article 21.4: Committee on Cooperation and Capacity Building

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Cooperation and Capacity Building (Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall:

(a) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties in areas including, but not limited to, experiences and lessons learned through cooperation and capacity building activities undertaken between the Parties;

(b) discuss and consider issues or proposals for future cooperation and capacity building activities;

(c) initiate and undertake collaboration, as appropriate, to enhance donor coordination and facilitate public-private partnerships in cooperation and capacity building activities;

(d) invite, as appropriate, international donor institutions, private sector entities, non-governmental organisations or other relevant institutions, to assist in the development and implementation of cooperation and capacity building activities;

(e) establish ad hoc working groups, as appropriate, which may include government representatives, non-government representatives or both;

(f) coordinate with other committees, working groups and any other subsidiary body established under this Agreement as appropriate, in support of the development and implementation of cooperation and capacity building activities;

(g) review the implementation or operation of this Chapter; and

(h) engage in other activities as the Parties may decide.

3. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as necessary.

4. The Committee shall produce an agreed record of its meetings, including decisions and next steps and, as appropriate, report to the Commission.

Article 21.5: Resources

Recognising the different levels of development of the Parties, the Parties shall work to provide the appropriate financial or in-kind resources for cooperation and capacity building activities conducted under this Chapter, subject to the availability of resources and the comparative capabilities that different Parties possess to achieve the goals of this Chapter.

Article 21.6: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.


*************** Chapter 22 ***************

--- Competitiveness and Business Facilitation ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/6260e31f17fa)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

The chapter on Competitiveness and Business Facilitation will help TPP reach its potential to improve the competitiveness of all participating countries, and in particular to ensure that U.S. workers and businesses are dealt into regional supply chains, not left on the sidelines. The chapter creates formal mechanisms to review the impact of TPP on its members’ competitiveness, through dialogues among governments and between government, business, and civil society, with a particular focus on deepening of regional supply chains, to assess progress, take advantage of new opportunities, and address any challenges that may emerge as the agreement goes into effect.

Overview

The Competitiveness and Business Facilitation chapter creates mechanisms by which governments can make the assessments and get the information they need to assess the agreement’s overall contribution to its participants’ competitiveness. To do so, it establishes means to regularly review whether implementation of the agreement is leading to the anticipated gains in regional competitiveness; and if not, to analyze why this is, consider recommendations on addressing the problem, and to ensure stakeholder input into reviews. Its specific features include:

Committee on Competitiveness and Business Facilitation

The chapter establishes a Committee on Competitiveness and Business Facilitation, made up of TPP countries with input from TPP stakeholders, to meet regularly to review the agreement’s impact on regional and national competitiveness, and on regional economic integration. The Committee will be able consider advice and recommendations from stakeholders on ways the agreement can further enhance competitiveness, including recommendations on enhancing the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in regional supply chains.

Supply Chain Development

The chapter identifies development and strengthening of regional supply chains as an objective of the TPP agreement. It establishes a basic framework for the Committee to assess supply chain performance under TPP, including submission of reports to the TPP Parties with findings and recommendations; consideration of ways to promote TPP Small and Medium-sized Enterprise (SME) participation in supply chains; review of stakeholder and expert input; and regularly scheduled meetings.

New Features

Drawing from experience in Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum initiatives related to regional competitiveness and supply chain development, TPP is the first U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to include new stand-alone commitments promoting the development and strengthening of supply chains among its members. The Competitiveness and Business Facilitation chapter complements previous work on these issues in an innovative way by enabling TPP members to see not only the implementation of specific obligations, but their effectiveness in working as a whole to improve competitiveness and supply chain efficiency as the agreement goes into effect, and to consider improvements in the future.

Impact

Asia-Pacific trade has evolved over the past decades away from a classic production process in which exports are fully manufactured in one country and exchanged for imports fully manufactured in another, toward a newer model of highly-specialized production, in which products like smart phones and pacemakers mesh the production strengths of different countries. American workers and businesses now use Asia-Pacific supply chains for a wide variety of purposes — for example, to ensure just-in-time access to intermediate goods and raw materials for final production of complex high-value goods such as aircraft or medical equipment in the United States — while U.S.-based services providers support all participants with express delivery services, Internet and telecommunications services, financing, and other services.

Ability to reach these supply chains is already a large factor in American exporting success. For example, in 2009 our 11 TPP partners’ exports included $118 billion in U.S.-made inputs — an amount nearly equal to that year’s U.S. goods exports to China and Japan combined. And the enhanced access of innovative U.S. products to Asia-Pacific supply chains will be a powerful driver of future U.S. exports.

One of TPP’s goals is to deepen and broaden these networks spanning four continents around the Pacific. The many separate commitments developed throughout all the chapters of the agreement — for example, telecommunications commitments, market access for goods, customs and trade facilitation, technical barriers to trade — have their own purposes, but are also designed to work together organically to improve the competitive strength of the United States, each of the other TPP Parties, and the region as a whole.

Achieving the deeper levels of integration that the TPP governments and stakeholders envision depends on a successful effort to ensure that these commitments support and complement one another as the TPP Parties intend. The Competitiveness and Business Facilitation chapter will help achieve this through ongoing work to:

Assess the overall effects of a wide range of complex commitments spread across many different chapters of an agreement and implemented by a wide variety of agencies.Ensure regular provision of advice and analysis from a broad range of stakeholders, including businesses in all phases of the supply chain, academics, consumers, and civil society.


*************** Chapter 23 ***************

--- Development ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/a9869aa451c4)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

The TPP joins countries at widely varying levels of development. Recognizing this, the Development chapter creates a permanent Committee to help ensure that the Agreement’s developing-country Parties can take full advantage of the opportunities TPP creates for development and poverty reduction, and to focus attention on major development goals including inclusion of women, micro-enterprise, poverty reduction, and education, science, and technology.

Overview

The Development chapter, in tandem with the Cooperation and Capacity Building chapter, addresses the above challenges not through an assistance program, but through an initiative to leverage public and private sector resources to maximize the TPP Agreement’s development benefits.

Development Role

The Development chapter explicitly affirms the goal of Parties to improve economic opportunities in support of development, inclusive growth, and regional economic integration, and further, that these goals can be enhanced by cooperation among Parties, recognizing the different levels of development of the TPP countries.

Development Priorities

The chapter includes three specific areas to be considered for collaborative work once TPP enters into force, including:

Broad-Based Economic GrowthPromoting broad-based economic growth through policies that take advantage of trade and investment opportunities created by the TPP Agreement can contribute, among other goals, to sustainable development, poverty reduction, and the promotion of micro, small- and medium-sized businesses.Women and Economic GrowthEnhancing opportunities for women to participate in the domestic and global economy through TPP contributes to economic development, including through activities aimed at helping women build capacity and skill; enhancing their access to markets, technology and financing; developing women leadership networks; and identifying best practices in workplace flexibility.Education, Science and Technology, Research and InnovationPolicies related to education, science and technology, research and innovation can help Parties maximize the benefits of the TPP agreement, including through activities aimed at developing expertise and managerial skills, and enhancing enterprises’ ability to transform innovations into competitive products and start-up businesses.

TPP Development Committee to Promote Joint Development Activities

The chapter establishes a TPP Development Committee that will meet regularly to promote voluntary cooperative work to identify and potentially support ways for TPP’s developing economies to tap new opportunities created by TPP for their development priorities. We anticipate that the Committee will work with governmental bodies as well as civil society groups, private companies, academic institutions, and non-governmental organizations, and promote joint activities to promote and align development activity, expand joint engagements in science, technology, and research; and facilitate public-private partnerships to enable private enterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises to bring their expertise to bear to support development goals

New Features

TPP is the first U.S. agreement to include a development chapter, incorporating commitments to promote sustainable development and broad-based economic growth. It has the potential to support new cooperative activities aimed at enhancing the ability of women to fully access and benefit from TPP, as well as activities designed to promote education, science, technology and innovation, including through science and technology agreements, public-private partnerships, and other joint development activities.

Impact

The Asia-Pacific region has been the center of one of the most rapid reductions of poverty in history. The World Bank estimates that from 2002 to 2011, despite the financial crisis, the number of Asians living in absolute poverty fell from 518 million to 161 million people, or by 70 percent. In the same period, Latin America has also seen a nearly 50-percent cut in absolute poverty. World Bank projections suggest the possibility of near-elimination of deep poverty in the Asia-Pacific over the next 15 years.

To further this progress, the TPP partners will need to further promote trade and investment by strengthening regional integration, spurring innovation, and ensuring inclusive and sustainable growth. The United States has many decades of experience in trade and development policy, dating to the Kennedy era Alliance for Progress, the creation of the Generalized System of Preferences in the 1970s, and the African Growth and Opportunity Act in 2000. In TPP, we have an opportunity to draw on this experience and the ideas of our partners and civil society groups, in pursuit of equity, inclusion, and the alleviation of poverty in the world’s most populous region.

Complementing the agreement’s provisions on market access, e-commerce, customs, and other issues, the Development chapter’s institutional focus on development-related issues will help to ensure that TPP will be a model of high-standard trade and economic integration, that TPP’s developing-country members can obtain the complete benefits of the agreement, and that they are fully able to implement their commitments. This will help sustain growth rates, alleviate poverty, promote food security, and boost living standards broadly for citizens in all TPP countries; and at the same time, enable TPP’s developing-country members to emerge as more prosperous societies and stronger markets for America’s goods and services.

Article 23.1: General Provisions

1. The Parties affirm their commitment to promote and strengthen an open trade and investment environment that seeks to improve welfare, reduce poverty, raise living standards and create new employment opportunities in support of development.

2. The Parties acknowledge the importance of development in promoting inclusive economic growth, as well as the instrumental role that trade and investment can play in contributing to economic development and prosperity. Inclusive economic growth includes a more broad-based distribution of the benefits of economic growth through the expansion of business and industry, the creation of jobs, and the alleviation of poverty.

3. The Parties acknowledge that economic growth and development contribute to achieving the objectives of this Agreement of promoting regional economic integration.

4. The Parties also acknowledge that effective domestic coordination of trade, investment and development policies can contribute to sustainable economic growth.

5. The Parties recognise the potential for joint development activities between the Parties to reinforce efforts to achieve sustainable development goals.

6. The Parties also recognise that activities carried out under Chapter 21 (Cooperation and Capacity Building) are an important component of joint development activities.

Article 23.2: Promotion of Development

1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of each Party’s leadership in implementing development policies, including policies that are designed for its nationals to maximise the use of the opportunities created by this Agreement.

2. The Parties acknowledge that this Agreement has been designed in a manner that takes into account the different levels of economic development of the Parties, including through provisions that support and enable the achievement of national development goals.

3. The Parties further recognise that transparency, good governance and accountability contribute to the effectiveness of development policies.

Article 23.3: Broad-Based Economic Growth

1. The Parties acknowledge that broad-based economic growth reduces poverty, enables sustainable delivery of basic services, and expands opportunities for people to live healthy and productive lives.

2. The Parties recognise that broad-based economic growth promotes peace, stability, democratic institutions, attractive investment opportunities, and effectiveness in addressing regional and global challenges.

3. The Parties also recognise that generating and sustaining broad-based economic growth requires sustained high-level commitment by their governments to effectively and efficiently administer public institutions, invest in public infrastructure, welfare, health and education systems, and foster entrepreneurship and access to economic opportunity.

4. The Parties may enhance broad-based economic growth through policies that take advantage of trade and investment opportunities created by this Agreement in order to contribute to, among other things, sustainable development and the reduction of poverty. These policies may include those related to the promotion of market-based approaches aimed at improving trading conditions and access to finance for vulnerable areas or populations, and SMEs.

Article 23.4: Women and Economic Growth

1. The Parties recognise that enhancing opportunities in their territories for women, including workers and business owners, to participate in the domestic and global economy contributes to economic development. The Parties further recognise the benefit of sharing their diverse experiences in designing, implementing and strengthening programmes to encourage this participation.

2. Accordingly, the Parties shall consider undertaking cooperative activities aimed at enhancing the ability of women, including workers and business owners, to fully access and benefit from the opportunities created by this Agreement. These activities may include providing advice or training, such as through the exchange of officials, and exchanging information and experience on:

(a) programmes aimed at helping women build their skills and capacity, and enhance their access to markets, technology and financing;

(b) developing women’s leadership networks; and

(c) identifying best practices related to workplace flexibility.

Article 23.5: Education, Science and Technology, Research and Innovation

1. The Parties recognise that the promotion and development of education, science and technology, research and innovation can play an important role in accelerating growth, enhancing competitiveness, creating jobs, and expanding trade and investment among the Parties.

2. The Parties further recognise that policies related to education, science and technology, research and innovation can help Parties maximise the benefits derived from this Agreement. Accordingly, Parties may encourage the design of policies in these areas that take into consideration trade and investment opportunities arising from this Agreement, in order to further increase those benefits. Those policies may include initiatives with the private sector, including those aimed at developing relevant expertise and managerial skills, and enhancing enterprises’ ability to transform innovations into competitive products and start-up businesses.

Article 23.6: Joint Development Activities

1. The Parties recognise that joint activities between the Parties to promote maximisation of the development benefits derived from this Agreement can reinforce national development strategies, including, where appropriate, through work with bilateral partners, private companies, academic institutions and non-governmental organisations.

2. When mutually agreed, two or more Parties shall endeavour to facilitate joint activities between relevant government, private and multilateral institutions so that the benefits derived from this Agreement might more effectively advance each Party’s development goals. These joint activities may include:

(a) discussion between Parties to promote, where appropriate, alignment of Parties’ development assistance and finance programmes with national development priorities;

(b) consideration of ways to expand engagement in science, technology and research to foster the application of innovative uses of science and technology, promote development and build capacity;

(c) facilitation of public and private sector partnerships that enable private enterprises, including SMEs, to bring their expertise and resources to cooperative ventures with government agencies in support of development goals; and

(d) involvement of the private sector, including philanthropic organisations and businesses, and non-governmental organisations in activities to support development.

Article 23.7: Committee on Development

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Development (Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall:

(a) facilitate the exchange of information on Parties’ experiences regarding the formulation and implementation of national policies intended to derive the greatest possible benefits from this Agreement;

(b) facilitate the exchange of information on Parties’ experiences and lessons learned through joint development activities undertaken under Article 23.6 (Joint Development Activities);

(c) discuss any proposals for future joint development activities in support of development policies related to trade and investment;

(d) invite, as appropriate, international donor institutions, private sector entities, non-governmental organisations or other relevant institutions to assist in the development and implementation of joint development activities;

(e) carry out other functions as the Parties may decide in respect of maximising the development benefits derived from this Agreement; and

(f) consider issues associated with the implementation and operation of this Chapter, with a view towards considering ways the Chapter may enhance the development benefits of this Agreement.

3. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as necessary.

4. In carrying out its functions, the Committee may work with other committees, working groups and any other subsidiary body established under this Agreement.

Article 23. 8: Relation to Other Chapters

In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 23.9: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.


*************** Chapter 24 ***************

--- Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/8de15a02d843)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

Since the launch of the TPP talks, one of the United States’ core goals has been to promote and support American small and medium-sized enterprises entering global trade, and to address barriers that pose disproportionate challenges to small business exports. These include issues such as inaccessible or overly complex trade paperwork, opaque regulatory processes and corruption, inefficiency of customs administration, restrictions on Internet data flows, weak logistics services that raise costs, and slow delivery of small shipments. The Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SME) chapter bolsters substantive commitments on these issues in chapters like those on Customs and Trade Facilitation, E-Commerce, and others by providing readily accessible information to small and medium-sized enterprises on the opportunities TPP will offer, and giving them an ongoing means to engage with TPP governments on ways to enhance the functioning of the agreement so as to benefit small- and medium-sized enterprises.

Overview

Dedicated On-Line Website with SME Information

To ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises have ready access to tailored information that will enable them to fully participate in and benefit from TPP, the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise chapter includes commitments by each TPP Party to create a website targeted at small and medium-sized enterprise users to provide easily accessible information on the agreement and how they can take advantage of it. These websites will distill all the relevant information spread out over hundreds of pages of the TPP Agreement, plus additional country-specific information, into single user-friendly sites tailored to the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises. This will include a description of the provisions of TPP relevant to small and medium-sized enterprises, contact information for relevant agencies in each TPP country; information on standards and regulations in each TPP country; procedures concerning intellectual property rights; foreign investment regulations; business registration procedures; employment regulations; and taxation procedures.

Establishment of a TPP Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Committee

To ensure ongoing engagement by TPP Parties on issues related to small and medium-sized enterprises, the chapter establishes a Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Committee that would meet regularly to review how well small and medium-sized enterprises appear to be availing themselves of the benefits of TPP. This Committee will also consider recommendations on ways to further enhance the benefits of TPP for small and medium-sized enterprises. We expect its activities also to include cooperation or capacity building activities to support small and medium-sized enterprises, in areas such as export counseling, trade assistance, and training programs for small and medium-sized enterprises; information sharing; and other activities.

New Features

TPP is the first U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to include a separate chapter focusing on issues specific to SMEs. It will ensure easy on-line access to relevant information and provide a means to address issues of particular interest and concern to small and medium-sized enterprises in an ongoing manner. In doing so, we expect the TPP to make it easier for U.S. SMEs — from small specialized manufacturers and small food exporters to independent craftsmen and artisans and small tech start-ups — to take advantage of the opportunities the agreement will create.

Impact

The evolution of information technology and logistics makes it easier and cheaper than ever before for small businesses to find customers and sell their products and services all over the world. Small, specialized manufacturers, artists, apps entrepreneurs, immigrant-owned businesses and many others now regularly use websites, email, online auctions, and other new tools to reach foreign customers at low cost, and express delivery services to get their products to buyers all over the world with speed and precision. As a result, their share of American exports is growing. Where in 2006 small and midsize exporters accounted for 29.1 percent of U.S. goods exports, in 2014 they accounted for fully one third.

The enhanced ability of small and medium-sized enterprises to trade internationally promises large future rewards for entrepreneurs and workers alike. Businesses that export tend to hire more and pay more than businesses that do not export. A 2012 study, for example, showed that African-American owned businesses which export employed an average of 33 workers with compensation averaging $44,016 per worker — four times the eight workers employed on average by non-exporters, at compensation levels nearly 80 percent higher than the $24,750 per worker for African-American owned businesses that do not export. Hispanic-owned exporting businesses likewise employed an average of 19 people with compensation averaging $43,880 per worker; non-exporting Hispanic-owned businesses employed an average of eight workers, with compensation averaging $27,060 per worker.

Nonetheless, the number of small businesses participating in international trade remains relatively small. Less than 5 percent of U.S. small businesses export, and over half of these do so to only one country (in many cases to Canada or Mexico.) This low rate in part reflects the fact that, because of a series of policy challenges, exporting remains more difficult for small- and medium-sized businesses than it is for large firms and multinationals. Some of these challenges are the same for small firms as for large ones, but the small firms are affected disproportionately because they have fewer resources available to overcome these obstacles. The lack of transparent or easily accessible information on foreign laws, regulations and processes blocks many small businesses from participating in international trade from the start. Small businesses able to overcome this obstacle then face greater relative costs than larger firms in managing foreign regulations, paperwork, and fees and charges. They also may face burdensome customs regulations; lack of efficient express delivery services, on-line auction sites, and/or secure online payment options; intellectual property theft, and differing regulatory regimes in foreign markets — all further discouraging them from exporting.

An agreement that is genuinely effective for smaller businesses accordingly must address many issues that larger firms can view simply as costs of doing business. It also needs to take special care to elicit advice on policy and on implementation from smaller firms, which rarely have offices overseas or government affairs offices to collect and analyze information about trade and regulatory issues. TPP deals with many of these challenges through specific obligations contained in its other chapters, such as Trade in Goods, Customs, E-Commerce, Financial Services, Intellectual Property, Technical Barriers to Trade, Transparency and Anti-Corruption, and others. The Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprise chapter is designed to address the overall challenges smaller businesses face in learning about the opportunities these substantive obligations create for them, and ensuring that they are able to raise concerns about implementation or alert governments to ways small and medium-sized businesses can take advantage of new opportunities as the agreement is implemented.

Article 24.1: Information Sharing

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain its own publicly accessible website containing information regarding this Agreement, including:

(a) the text of this Agreement, including all annexes, tariff schedules and product specific rules of origin;

(b) a summary of this Agreement; and

(c) information designed for SMEs that contains:

(i) a description of the provisions in this Agreement that the Party considers to be relevant to SMEs; and

(ii) any additional information that the Party considers useful for SMEs interested in benefitting from the opportunities provided by this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall include in its website links to:

(a) the equivalent websites of the other Parties; and

(b) the websites of its government agencies and other appropriate entities that provide information the Party considers useful to any person interested in trading, investing, or doing business in that Party’s territory.

3. Subject to each Party’s laws and regulations, the information described in paragraph 2(b) may include:

(a) customs regulations and procedures;

(b) regulations and procedures concerning intellectual property rights;

(c) technical regulations, standards, and sanitary and phytosanitary measures relating to importation and exportation;

(d) foreign investment regulations;

(e) business registration procedures;

(f) employment regulations; and

(g) taxation information.

When possible, each Party shall endeavour to make the information available in English.

4. Each Party shall regularly review the information and links on the website referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 to ensure that such information and links are up-to-date and accurate.

Article 24.2: Committee on SMEs

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on SMEs (Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall:

(a) identify ways to assist SMEs of the Parties to take advantage of the commercial opportunities under this Agreement;

(b) exchange and discuss each Party’s experiences and best practices in supporting and assisting SME exporters with respect to, among other things, training programmes, trade education, trade finance, identifying commercial partners in other Parties, and establishing good business credentials;

(c) develop and promote seminars, workshops or other activities to inform SMEs of the benefits available to them under this Agreement;

(d) explore opportunities for capacity building to assist the Parties in developing and enhancing SME export counselling, assistance and training programmes;

(e) recommend additional information that a Party may include on the website referred to in Article 24.1 (Information Sharing);

(f) review and coordinate the Committee’s work programme with those of other committees, working groups and any subsidiary body established under this Agreement, as well as those of other relevant international bodies, in order not to duplicate those work programmes and to identify appropriate opportunities for cooperation to improve the ability of SMEs to engage in trade and investment opportunities provided by this Agreement;

(g) facilitate the development of programmes to assist SMEs to participate and integrate effectively into the global supply chain;

(h) exchange information to assist in monitoring the implementation of this Agreement as it relates to SMEs;

(i) submit a report of its activities on a regular basis and make appropriate recommendations to the Commission; and

(j) consider any other matter pertaining to SMEs as the Committee may decide, including any issues raised by SMEs regarding their ability to benefit from this Agreement.

3. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as necessary.

4. The Committee may seek to collaborate with appropriate experts and international donor organisations in carrying out its programmes and activities.

Article 24.3: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.


*************** Chapter 25 ***************

--- Regulatory Coherence ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/6672076f307a)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

Through the Regulatory Coherence chapter, the United States is seeking to foster an open, fair, and predictable regulatory environment for U.S. businesses operating in Asia-Pacific markets, including through principles that are central features of the U.S. regulatory process, such as transparency, 140 impartiality, and due process as well as coordination across the government to ensure a coherent regulatory approach. The chapter does not affect the rights of the United States or other TPP Parties to regulate for public health, safety, worker and environmental protections, security, financial stability, and other public interest reasons, nor will anything in it require changes to U.S. regulations or U.S. regulatory procedures.

Overview

Importance of Regulatory Coherence

The Regulatory Coherence chapter includes provisions promoting the use by TPP governments of good regulatory practices in developing and implementing regulatory measures. It also recognizes the important role such policies can play in enhancing the benefits of the TPP Agreement and promoting regional trade and investment, as well as that each Party has the right to identify its regulatory priorities and establish and implement measures to address these priorities at levels it considers appropriate. For the United States, these features apply only to federal regulatory measures. Establishment of Coordination and Review Processes or Mechanisms

The chapter aims to facilitate regulatory coherence in each TPP country by promoting mechanisms for effective interagency consultation and coordination for agencies and issues Parties agree to cover.

Implementation of Core Good Regulatory Practices

The chapter also encourages widely-accepted good regulatory practices. These include impact assessments of proposed regulatory measures in order to assess the need and range of feasible alternatives, and communication of the grounds for the selection of the chosen regulatory alternative and the nature of the regulation being introduced. They also include ensuring that regulations are clearly and concisely written; that the public has access to information on new regulatory measures, if possible online; and that existing regulatory measures are periodically reviewed to determine if they remain the most effective means of achieving the desired objective. In addition, it encourages TPP governments to provide public notice annually of all regulatory measures it expects to take the following year. All these practices are standard in the United States.

Framework for TPP Cooperation

The chapter promotes ongoing work on regulatory coherence through a committee that will give TPP countries, businesses, and civil society continuing opportunities to report on implementation, share experiences on best practices, and consider potential areas for cooperatio

New Features

TPP is the first U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to include a chapter on regulatory coherence, reflecting a growing appreciation of the relevance of this issue to international trade and investment. As in the United States, we expect these commitments to promote “good regulatory practice” principles in the regulatory development process, including coordination among regulators, opportunities for stakeholder input, and fact-based regulatory decisions that will serve to eliminate the prospect of overlapping and inconsistent regulatory requirements or regulations being developed unfairly and without a sound basis, including so as to benefit a particular stakeholder. Nothing in the chapter will affect the U.S. or other TPP Parties’ right to regulate in the public interest, nor will anything in it require changes to U.S. regulations or U.S. regulatory procedures.

Impact

Governments are responsible for regulating to foster fair competition, consumer safety, environmental quality, workplace safety and many other policy goals. In the United States, the rulemaking process is well developed so as to ensure transparency, impartiality, and due process. The U.S. also has a well-established system for coordination among agencies across the government to safeguard against “stove-piped” internal decisions that could lead to conflicting regulatory approaches by different agencies responsible for related issues or to agencies being inappropriately influenced by the stakeholders — often domestic — that they are responsible for regulating.

The legal and regulatory environment in countries across the Asia-Pacific is diverse. The region’s governments and publics may have differing priorities and reach different conclusions on specific regulatory issues. They share a common interest, however, in developing regulations based on reliable and objective data; avoiding conflicting requirements in their own markets; allowing requirements to be met in the most effective way possible to achieve the policy objectives; and ensuring that public input helps inform decision-making so as to lead to the optimal outcomes. They also share an interest in cooperating and exchanging information on appropriate regulatory approaches to respond to new challenges. This is particularly important as TPP economies become more integrated, businesses manage production and supply chains across borders, and workers increasingly depend on the jobs these production and supply chains support.

Coherent regulatory processes — coordinated across government agencies, designed and implemented based on good regulatory practices, and with opportunities for stakeholder input — are critical to creating open, fair and predictable environments for U.S. businesses operating in Asia-Pacific markets. The Regulatory Coherence chapter does not address specific regulatory issues related to trade and investment, but rather the overall process or system through which TPP members develop regulations. It will also help leverage regulatory best practices, while reaffirming the right of each TPP Party to identify its regulatory priorities and establish and implement measures to address these priorities as it considers appropriate.

Article 25.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

covered regulatory measure means the regulatory measure determined by each Party to be subject to this Chapter in accordance with Article 25.3 (Scope of Covered Regulatory Measures); and

regulatory measure means a measure of general application related to any matter covered by this Agreement adopted by regulatory agencies with which compliance is mandatory.

Article 25.2: General Provisions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, regulatory coherence refers to the use of good regulatory practices in the process of planning, designing, issuing, implementing and reviewing regulatory measures in order to facilitate achievement of domestic policy objectives, and in efforts across governments to enhance regulatory cooperation in order to further those objectives and promote international trade and investment, economic growth and employment.

2. The Parties affirm the importance of:

(a) sustaining and enhancing the benefits of this Agreement through regulatory coherence in terms of facilitating increased trade in goods and services and increased investment between the Parties;

(b) each Party’s sovereign right to identify its regulatory priorities and establish and implement regulatory measures to address these priorities, at the levels that the Party considers appropriate;

(c) the role that regulation plays in achieving public policy objectives;

(d) taking into account input from interested persons in the development of regulatory measures; and

(e) developing regulatory cooperation and capacity building between the Parties.

Article 25.3: Scope of Covered Regulatory Measures

Each Party shall promptly, and no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party, determine and make publicly available the scope of its covered regulatory measures. In determining the scope of covered regulatory measures, each Party should aim to achieve significant coverage.

Article 25.4: Coordination and Review Processes or Mechanisms

1. The Parties recognise that regulatory coherence can be facilitated through domestic mechanisms that increase interagency consultation and coordination associated with processes for developing regulatory measures. Accordingly, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that it has processes or mechanisms to facilitate the effective interagency coordination and review of proposed covered regulatory measures. Each Party should consider establishing and maintaining a national or central coordinating body for this purpose.

2. The Parties recognise that while the processes or mechanisms referred to in paragraph 1 may vary between Parties depending on their respective circumstances (including differences in levels of development and political and institutional structures), they should generally have as overarching characteristics the ability to:

(a) review proposed covered regulatory measures to determine the extent to which the development of such measures adheres to good regulatory practices, which may include but are not limited to those set out in Article 25.5 (Implementation of Core Good Regulatory Practices), and make recommendations based on that review;

(b) strengthen consultation and coordination among domestic agencies so as to identify potential overlap and duplication and to prevent the creation of inconsistent requirements across agencies;

(c) make recommendations for systemic regulatory improvements; and

(d) publicly report on regulatory measures reviewed, any proposals for systemic regulatory improvements, and any updates on changes to the processes and mechanisms referred to in paragraph 1.

Each Party should generally produce documents that include descriptions of those processes or mechanisms and that can be made available to the public.

Article 25.5: Implementation of Core Good Regulatory Practices

1. To assist in designing a measure to best achieve the Party’s objective, each Party should generally encourage relevant regulatory agencies, consistent with its laws and regulations, to conduct regulatory impact assessments when developing proposed covered regulatory measures that exceed a threshold of economic impact, or other regulatory impact, where appropriate, as established by the Party. Regulatory impact assessments may encompass a range of procedures to determine possible impacts.

2. Recognising that differences in the Parties’ institutional, social, cultural, legal and developmental circumstances may result in specific regulatory approaches, regulatory impact assessments conducted by a Party should, among other things:

(a) assess the need for a regulatory proposal, including a description of the nature and significance of the problem;

(b) examine feasible alternatives, including, to the extent feasible and consistent with laws and regulations, their costs and benefits, such as risks involved as well as distributive impacts, recognising that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify and monetise;

(c) explain the grounds for concluding that the selected alternative achieves the policy objectives in an efficient manner, including, if appropriate, reference to the costs and benefits and the potential for managing risks; and

(d) rely on the best reasonably obtainable existing information including relevant scientific, technical, economic or other information, within the boundaries of the authorities, mandates and resources of the particular regulatory agency.

3. When conducting regulatory impact assessments, a Party may take into consideration the potential impact of the proposed regulation on SMEs.

4. Each Party should ensure that new covered regulatory measures are plainly written and are clear, concise, well organised and easy to understand, recognising that some measures address technical issues and that relevant expertise may be needed to understand and apply them.

5. Subject to its laws and regulations, each Party should ensure that relevant regulatory agencies provide public access to information on new covered regulatory measures and, where practicable, make this information available online.

6. Each Party should review, at intervals it deems appropriate, its covered regulatory measures to determine whether specific regulatory measures it has implemented should be modified, streamlined, expanded or repealed so as to make the Party’s regulatory regime more effective in achieving the Party’s policy objectives.

7. Each Party should, in a manner it deems appropriate, and consistent with its laws and regulations, provide annual public notice of any covered regulatory measure that it reasonably expects its regulatory agencies to issue within the following 12-month period.

8. To the extent appropriate and consistent with its law, each Party should encourage its relevant regulatory agencies to consider regulatory measures in other Parties, as well as relevant developments in international, regional and other fora when planning covered regulatory measures.

Article 25.6: Committee on Regulatory Coherence

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Regulatory Coherence (Committee), composed of government representatives of the Parties.

2. The Committee shall consider issues associated with the implementation and operation of this Chapter. The Committee shall also consider identifying future priorities, including potential sectoral initiatives and cooperative activities, involving issues covered by this Chapter and issues related to regulatory coherence covered by other Chapters of this Agreement.

3. In identifying future priorities, the Committee shall take into account the activities of other committees, working groups and any other subsidiary body established under this Agreement and shall coordinate with them in order to avoid duplication of activities.

4. The Committee shall ensure that its work on regulatory cooperation offers value in addition to initiatives underway in other relevant fora and avoids undermining or duplicating such efforts.

5. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point to provide information, on request by another Party, regarding the implementation of this Chapter in accordance with Article 27.5 (Contact Points).

6. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as necessary.

7. At least once every five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Committee shall consider developments in the area of good regulatory practices and in best practices in maintaining processes or mechanisms referred to in Article 25.4.1 (Coordination and Review Processes or Mechanisms), as well as the Parties’ experiences in implementing this Chapter with a view towards considering whether to make recommendations to the Commission for improving the provisions of this Chapter so as to further enhance the benefits of this Agreement.

Article 25.7: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall cooperate in order to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter and to maximise the benefits arising from it. Cooperation activities shall take into consideration each Party’s needs, and may include:

(a) information exchanges, dialogues or meetings with other Parties;

(b) information exchanges, dialogues or meetings with interested persons, including with SMEs, of other Parties;

(c) training programmes, seminars and other relevant assistance;

(d) strengthening cooperation and other relevant activities between regulatory agencies; and

(e) other activities that Parties may agree.

2. The Parties further recognise that cooperation between Parties on regulatory matters can be enhanced through, among other things, ensuring that each Party’s regulatory measures are centrally available.

Article 25.8: Engagement with Interested Persons

The Committee shall establish appropriate mechanisms to provide continuing opportunities for interested persons of the Parties to provide input on matters relevant to enhancing regulatory coherence.

Article 25.9: Notification of Implementation

1. For the purposes of transparency, and to serve as a basis for cooperation and capacity building activities under this Chapter, each Party shall submit a notification of implementation to the Committee through the contact points designated pursuant to Article 27.5 (Contact Points) within two years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party and at least once every four years thereafter.

2. In its initial notification, each Party shall describe the steps that it has taken since the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party, and the steps that it plans to take to implement this Chapter, including those to:

(a) establish processes or mechanisms to facilitate effective interagency coordination and review of proposed covered regulatory measures in accordance with Article 25.4 (Coordination and Review Processes or Mechanisms);

(b) encourage relevant regulatory agencies to conduct regulatory impact assessments in accordance with Article 25.5.1 (Implementation of Core Good Regulatory Practices) and Article 25.5.2;

(c) ensure that covered regulatory measures are written and made available in accordance with Article 25.5.4 (Implementation of Core Good Regulatory Practices) and Article 25.5.5;

(d) review its covered regulatory measures in accordance with Article 25.6 (Implementation of Core Good Regulatory Practices); and

(e) provide information to the public in its annual notice of prospective covered regulatory measures in accordance with Article 25.7 (Implementation of Core Regulatory Practices).

3. In subsequent notifications, each Party shall describe the steps, including those set out in paragraph 2, that it has taken since the previous notification, and those that it plans to take to implement this Chapter, and to improve its adherence to it.

4. In its consideration of issues associated with the implementation and operation of this Chapter, the Committee may review notifications made by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1. During that review, Parties may ask questions or discuss specific aspects of that Party’s notification. The Committee may use its review and discussion of a notification as a basis for identifying opportunities for assistance and cooperative activities to provide assistance in accordance with Article 25.7 (Cooperation).

Article 25.10: Relation to Other Chapters

In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 25.11: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.


*************** Chapter 26 ***************

--- Transparency and Anti-Corruption ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/3d808cf86184)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

TPP’s Transparency and Anti-Corruption chapter promotes good governance and addresses the corrosive effects of bribery and corruption on trade, investment, and government policies related to trade and investment. Toward this end, the chapter ensures that U.S. exporters, service suppliers, investors, and other interested stakeholders in TPP have ready access to information about the laws, regulations, and other rules affecting trade or investment in TPP markets; guarantees due process rights; commits TPP Parties to have and enforce anti-bribery laws; and promotes rules against conflicts of interest in government. The chapter guarantees the full rights of governments to regulate for public health, environmental quality, and other public-policy goals.

Overview

Publication

The Transparency and Anti-Corruption chapter requires TPP Parties to ensure that, to the extent possible, their laws, regulations, and administrative rulings related to any matters covered by the TPP Agreement are publicly available and that regulations are subject to notice and comment.

Due Process Procedures

TPP Parties agree to ensure certain due process rights for TPP stakeholders in connection with administrative proceedings, including prompt review of any administrative action through independent and impartial judicial or administrative tribunals or procedures.

Measures to combat corruption

Each TPP Party commits to adopt or maintain laws that criminalize the offering of an undue advantage to a public official (or the solicitation of such an advantage by a public official), as well as other acts of corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment. Parties also commit to effectively enforce their anticorruption laws and regulations.

Promotion of integrity among government officials

TPP Parties agree to work to adopt or maintain a code of conduct for their public officials, as well as measures to decrease conflicts of interest. They also commit to increase training of public officials, take steps to discourage gifts, facilitate reporting of possible corruption, and provide for discipline of public officials engaging in acts of corruption.

Annex on Transparency and Procedural Fairness for Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices

The Annex to the Transparency and Anti-Corruption chapter recognizes the importance of key principles intended to facilitate high-quality healthcare and continued improvements in public health for TPP partners’ patients and the public. This annex will help ensure transparency and due process with respect to listing and reimbursement procedures in relevant national healthcare programs operated by national healthcare authorities. These transparency and due process requirements are best practices that are fully reflected in U.S. law and practice, including in the Medicare National Coverage Determination process. They require no changes to any U.S. healthcare program nor will they affect the U.S. government’s ability to pursue the best healthcare policy for its citizens, including future reforms or decisions on healthcare expenditures or cost containment. The commitments in this Annex are not subject to investor-state dispute settlement.

New Features

Corruption and governance issues are significant problems in many countries, which often harm U.S. exporters. TPP contains the strongest disciplines on transparency and anticorruption of any U.S. trade agreement. We expect that these will set a new high standard for action against corruption, including commitments to adopt, maintain, and enforce criminal laws to prevent corruption by public officials, to maintain codes of conduct to promote integrity among public officials, to adopt laws criminalizing corruption in accounting practice and to effectively enforce their anticorruption laws. At the same time, we expect TPP to set a new standard for transparency, including the maintenance of robust systems for allowing public input prior to the adoption of new laws and regulations and, once new measures are adopted, for easy access to information on how they operate.

Impact

The U.S. has been a leader in combatting international bribery and corruption since the passage of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in 1977. Succeeding decades have brought considerable achievements in this battle, notably with the creation and wide adoption of the OECD’s Anti-Bribery Convention in 1997 and its broadening at the United Nations in 2005.

The challenge of bribery and corruption remains large, however, and its price for the public and American businesses and workers remains high. American firms and their workers — given the U.S.’ strong anti-bribery laws and enforcement — likely lose opportunities for exports, jobs, and growth. The impact on governments and politics abroad is even more profound.

TPP’s Transparency and Anti-Corruption chapter provides an opportunity to make progress in the long campaign against corruption in global trade and investment, and to promote good governance. The challenges in this area include:

Variable and sometimes irregularly enforced national laws against bribery and corruption;Opaque rulemaking, encouraging favoritism and deterring merit-based success in trade, investment, and procurement; andLack of public input into laws and regulations before they are passed and promulgated.

In addition, we are seeking to address specific issues that may arise related to transparency and due process in the health sector. Our goal is to ensure transparency and procedural fairness in applicable systems, not to modify a TPP country’s system of healthcare or rights to determine healthcare expenditures and reimbursement rates.

Section A: Definitions

Article 26.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of official duties includes any use of the public official’s position, whether or not within the official’s authorised competence;

administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall generally within the ambit of that administrative ruling or interpretation and that establishes a norm of conduct, but does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good or service of another Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice;

foreign public official means any person holding a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office of a foreign country, at any level of government, whether appointed or elected, whether permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that person’s seniority; and any person exercising a public function for a foreign country, at any level of government, including for a public agency or public enterprise;

official of a public international organisation means an international civil servant or any person who is authorised by a public international organisation to act on its behalf; and

public official means:

(a) any person holding a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office of a Party, whether appointed or elected, whether permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that person’s seniority;

(b) any other person who performs a public function for a Party, including for a public agency or public enterprise, or provides a public service, as defined under the Party’s law and as applied in the pertinent area of that Party’s law; or

(c) any other person defined as a public official under a Party’s law.[1]

Section B: Transparency

Article 26.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made available in a manner that enables interested persons and Parties to become acquainted with them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall:

(a) publish in advance any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and other Parties with a reasonable opportunity to comment on those proposed measures.

3. To the extent possible, when introducing or changing the laws, regulations or procedures referred to in paragraph 1, each Party shall endeavour to provide a reasonable period between the date when those laws, regulations or procedures, proposed or final in accordance with its legal system, are made publicly available and the date when they enter into force.

4. With respect to a proposed regulation[2] of general application of a Party’s central level of government respecting any matter covered by this Agreement that is likely to affect trade or investment between the Parties and that is published in accordance with paragraph 2(a), each Party shall:

(a) publish the proposed regulation in an official journal, or on an official website, preferably online and consolidated into a single portal;

(b) endeavour to publish the proposed regulation:

(i) no less than 60 days in advance of the date on which comments are due; or

(ii) within another period in advance of the date on which comments are due that provides sufficient time for an interested person to evaluate the proposed regulation, and formulate and submit comments;

(c) to the extent possible, include in the publication under subparagraph (a) an explanation of the purpose of, and rationale for, the proposed regulation; and

(d) consider comments received during the comment period, and is encouraged to explain any significant modifications made to the proposed regulation, preferably on an official website or in an online journal.

5. Each Party shall, with respect to a regulation of general application adopted by its central level of government respecting any matter covered by this Agreement that is published in accordance with paragraph 1:

(a) promptly publish the regulation on a single official website or in an official journal of national circulation; and

(b) if appropriate, include with the publication an explanation of the purpose of and rationale for the regulation.

Article 26.3: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner all measures of general application with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement, each Party shall ensure in its administrative proceedings applying measures referred to in Article 26.2.1 (Publication) to a particular person, good or service of another Party in specific cases that:

(a) whenever possible, a person of another Party that is directly affected by a proceeding is provided with reasonable notice, in accordance with domestic procedures, of when a proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which the proceeding is initiated and a general description of any issue in question;

(b) a person of another Party that is directly affected by a proceeding is afforded a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of that person’s position prior to any final administrative action, when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit; and

(c) the procedures are in accordance with its law.

Article 26.4: Review and Appeal[3]

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purpose of the prompt review and, if warranted, correction of a final administrative action with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement. Those tribunals shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, with respect to the tribunals or procedures referred to in paragraph 1, the parties to a proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where required by its law, the record compiled by the relevant authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for in its domestic law, that the decision referred to in paragraph 2(b) shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action at issue.

Article 26.5: Provision of Information

1. If a Party considers that any proposed or actual measure may materially affect the operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect another Party’s interests under this Agreement, it shall, to the extent possible, inform that other Party of the proposed or actual measure.

2. On request of another Party, a Party shall promptly provide information and respond to questions pertaining to any proposed or actual measure that the requesting Party considers may affect the operation of this Agreement, whether or not the requesting Party has been previously informed of that measure.

3. A Party may convey any request or provide information under this Article to the other Parties through their contact points.

4. Any information provided under this Article shall be without prejudice as to whether the measure in question is consistent with this Agreement.

Section C: Anti-Corruption

Article 26.6: Scope

1. The Parties affirm their resolve to eliminate bribery and corruption in international trade and investment. Recognising the need to build integrity within both the public and private sectors and that each sector has complementary responsibilities in this regard, the Parties affirm their adherence to the APEC Conduct Principles for Public Officials, July 2007, and encourage observance of the APEC Code of Conduct for Business: Business Integrity and Transparency Principles for the Private Sector, September 2007.

2. The scope of this Section is limited to measures to eliminate bribery and corruption with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement.

3. The Parties recognise that the description of offences adopted or maintained in accordance with this Section, and of the applicable legal defences or legal principles controlling the lawfulness of conduct, is reserved to each Party’s law, and that those offences shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with each Party’s law.

4. Each Party shall ratify or accede to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, done at New York, October 31, 2003 (UNCAC).

Article 26.7: Measures to Combat Corruption

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences under its law, in matters that affect international trade or investment, when committed intentionally, by any person subject to its jurisdiction:[4]

(a) the promise, offering or giving to a public official, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage, for the official or another person or entity, in order that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the exercise of his or her official duties;

(b) the solicitation or acceptance by a public official, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage, for the official or another person or entity, in order that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the exercise of his or her official duties;

(c) the promise, offering or giving to a foreign public official or an official of a public international organisation, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage,[5] for the official or another person or entity, in order that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the exercise of his or her official duties, in order to obtain or retain business or other undue advantage in relation to the conduct of international business; and

(d) the aiding or abetting, or conspiracy[6] in the commission of any of the offences described in subparagraphs (a) through (c).

2. Each Party shall make the commission of an offence described in paragraph 1 or 5 liable to sanctions that take into account the gravity of that offence.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures as may be necessary, consistent with its legal principles, to establish the liability of legal persons for offences described in paragraph 1 or 5. In particular, each Party shall ensure that legal persons held liable for offences described in paragraph 1 or 5 are subject to effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal or non-criminal sanctions, which include monetary sanctions.

4. No Party shall allow a person subject to its jurisdiction to deduct from taxes expenses incurred in connection with the commission of an offence described in paragraph 1.

5. In order to prevent corruption, each Party shall adopt or maintain measures as may be necessary, in accordance with its laws and regulations, regarding the maintenance of books and records, financial statement disclosures, and accounting and auditing standards, to prohibit the following acts carried out for the purpose of committing any of the offences described in paragraph 1:

(a) the establishment of off-the-books accounts;

(b) the making of off-the-books or inadequately identified transactions;

(c) the recording of non-existent expenditure;

(d) the entry of liabilities with incorrect identification of their objects;

(e) the use of false documents; and

(f) the intentional destruction of bookkeeping documents earlier than foreseen by the law.[7]

6. Each Party shall consider adopting or maintaining measures to protect, against any unjustified treatment, any person who, in good faith and on reasonable grounds, reports to the competent authorities any facts concerning offences described in paragraph 1 or 5.

Article 26.8: Promoting Integrity among Public Officials

1. To fight corruption in matters that affect trade and investment, each Party should promote, among other things, integrity, honesty and responsibility among its public officials. To this end, each Party shall endeavour, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, to adopt or maintain:

(a) measures to provide adequate procedures for the selection and training of individuals for public positions considered especially vulnerable to corruption, and the rotation, if appropriate, of those individuals to other positions;

(b) measures to promote transparency in the behaviour of public officials in the exercise of public functions;

(c) appropriate policies and procedures to identify and manage actual or potential conflicts of interest of public officials;

(d) measures that require senior and other appropriate public officials to make declarations to appropriate authorities regarding, among other things, their outside activities, employment, investments, assets and substantial gifts or benefits from which a conflict of interest may result with respect to their functions as public officials; and

(e) measures to facilitate reporting by public officials of acts of corruption to appropriate authorities, if those acts come to their notice in the performance of their functions.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain codes or standards of conduct for the correct, honourable and proper performance of public functions, and measures providing for disciplinary or other measures, if warranted, against public officials who violate the codes or standards established in accordance with this paragraph.

3. Each Party, to the extent consistent with the fundamental principles of its legal system, shall consider establishing procedures through which a public official accused of an offence described in Article 26.7.1 (Measures to Combat Corruption) may, where appropriate, be removed, suspended or reassigned by the appropriate authority, bearing in mind respect for the principle of the presumption of innocence.

4. Each Party shall, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system and without prejudice to judicial independence, adopt or maintain measures to strengthen integrity, and to prevent opportunities for corruption, among members of the judiciary in matters that affect international trade or investment. These measures may include rules with respect to the conduct of members of the judiciary.

Article 26.9: Application and Enforcement of Anti-Corruption Laws

1. In accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, no Party shall fail to effectively enforce its laws or other measures adopted or maintained to comply with Article 26.7.1 (Measures to Combat Corruption) through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party, as an encouragement for trade and investment.[8]

2. In accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, each Party retains the right for its law enforcement, prosecutorial and judicial authorities to exercise their discretion with respect to the enforcement of its anti-corruption laws. Each Party retains the right to take bona fide decisions with regard to the allocation of its resources.

3. The Parties affirm their commitments under applicable international agreements or arrangements to cooperate with each other, consistent with their respective legal and administrative systems, to enhance the effectiveness of law enforcement actions to combat the offences described in

Article 26.7.1 (Measures to Combat Corruption).

Article 26.10: Participation of Private Sector and Society

1. Each Party shall take appropriate measures, within its means and in accordance with fundamental principles of its legal system, to promote the active participation of individuals and groups outside the public sector, such as enterprises, civil society, non-governmental organisations and community-based organisations, in the prevention of and the fight against corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment, and to raise public awareness regarding the existence, causes and gravity of, and the threat posed by, corruption. To this end, a Party may:

(a) undertake public information activities and public education programmes that contribute to non-tolerance of corruption;

(b) adopt or maintain measures to encourage professional associations and other non- governmental organisations, if appropriate, in their efforts to encourage and assist enterprises, in particular SMEs, in developing internal controls, ethics and compliance programmes or measures for preventing and detecting bribery and corruption in international trade and investment;

(c) adopt or maintain measures to encourage company management to make statements in their annual reports or otherwise publicly disclose their internal controls, ethics and compliance programmes or measures, including those that contribute to preventing and detecting bribery and corruption in international trade and investment; and

(d) adopt or maintain measures that respect, promote and protect the freedom to seek, receive, publish and disseminate information concerning corruption.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to encourage private enterprises, taking into account their structure and size, to:

(a) develop and adopt sufficient internal auditing controls to assist in preventing and detecting acts of corruption in matters affecting international trade or investment; and

(b) ensure that their accounts and required financial statements are subject to appropriate auditing and certification procedures.

3. Each Party shall take appropriate measures to ensure that its relevant anti-corruption bodies are known to the public and shall provide access to those bodies, if appropriate, for the reporting, including anonymously, of any incident that may be considered to constitute an offence described in Article 26.7.1 (Measures to Combat Corruption).

Article 26.11: Relation to Other Agreements

Subject to Article 26.6.4 (Scope), nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under UNCAC, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, done at New York, November 15, 2000, the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions, with its Annex, done at Paris, November 21, 1997, or the Inter-American Convention Against Corruption, done at Caracas, March 29, 1996.

Article 26.12: Dispute Settlement

1. Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement), as modified by this Article, shall apply to this Section.

2. A Party may only have recourse to the procedures set out in this Article and Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) if it considers that a measure of another Party is inconsistent with an obligation under this Section, or that another Party has otherwise failed to carry out an obligation under this Section, in a manner affecting trade or investment between Parties.

3. No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under this Article or Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under Article 26.9 (Application and Enforcement of Anti-Corruption Laws).

4. Article 28.5 (Consultations) shall apply to consultations under this Section, with the following modifications:

(a) a Party other than a consulting Party may make a request in writing to the consulting Parties to participate in the consultations, no later than seven days after the date of circulation of the request for consultations, if it considers that its trade or investment is affected by the matter at issue. That Party shall include in its request an explanation of how its trade or investment is affected by the matter at issue. That Party may participate in consultations if the consulting Parties agree; and

(b) the consulting Parties shall involve officials of their relevant anti-corruption authorities in the consultations.

5. The consulting Parties shall make every effort to find a mutually satisfactory solution to the matter, which may include appropriate cooperative activities or a work plan.

Annex 26-A: Transparency and Procedural Fairness for Pharmaceutical Products and Medical Devices[9]

Paragraph 26-A.1: Principles

The Parties are committed to facilitating high-quality healthcare and continued improvements in public health for their nationals, including patients and the public. In pursuing these objectives, the Parties acknowledge the importance of the following principles:

(a) the importance of protecting and promoting public health and the important role played by pharmaceutical products and medical devices[10] in delivering high-quality health care;

(b) the importance of research and development, including innovation associated with research and development, related to pharmaceutical products and medical devices;

(c) the need to promote timely and affordable access to pharmaceutical products and medical devices, through transparent, impartial, expeditious, and accountable procedures, without prejudice to a Party’s right to apply appropriate standards of quality, safety, and efficacy; and

(d) the need to recognize the value of pharmaceutical products and medical devices through the operation of competitive markets or by adopting or maintaining procedures that appropriately value the objectively demonstrated therapeutic significance of a pharmaceutical product or medical device.

Paragraph 26-A.2: Procedural Fairness

To the extent that a Party’s national health care authorities operate or maintain procedures for listing new pharmaceutical products or medical devices for reimbursement purposes, or setting the amount of such reimbursement, under national health care programmes operated by the national health care authorities,[11] [12] the Party shall:

(a) ensure that consideration of all formal and duly formulated proposals for such listing of pharmaceutical products or medical devices for reimbursement is completed within a specified period of time[13];

(b) disclose procedural rules, methodologies, principles, and guidelines used to assess such proposals;

(c) afford applicants[14], and where appropriate, the public, timely opportunities to provide comments at relevant points in the decision-making process;

(d) provide applicants with written information sufficient to comprehend the basis for recommendations or determinations regarding the listing of new pharmaceutical products or medical devices for reimbursement by national healthcare authorities;

(e) make available:

(i) an independent review process; or

(ii) an internal review process, such as by the same expert or group of experts that made the recommendation or determination, provided that such a review process includes, at a minimum, a substantive reconsideration of the application[15] and

that may be invoked at the request of an applicant directly affected by such recommendation or determination by a Party’s national healthcare authorities not to list a pharmaceutical or medical device for reimbursement[16]; and

(f) provide written information to the public regarding such recommendations or determinations, while protecting information considered to be confidential under the Party’s law.

Paragraph 26-A.3: Dissemination of Information to Health Professionals and Consumers

As is permitted to be disseminated under the Party’s laws, regulations, and procedures, each Party shall permit a pharmaceutical product manufacturer to disseminate to health professionals and consumers through the manufacturer’s Internet site registered in the territory of the Party, and on other Internet sites registered in the territory of the Party linked to that site, truthful and not misleading information regarding its pharmaceutical products that are approved for marketing in the Party’s territory. A Party may require that the information includes a balance of risks and benefits and encompasses all indications for which the Party’s competent regulatory authorities have approved the marketing of the pharmaceutical product.

Paragraph 26-A.4: Consultation

1. To facilitate dialogue and mutual understanding of issues relating to this Annex, each Party shall give sympathetic consideration to and shall afford adequate opportunity for consultation regarding a written request by another Party to consult on any matter related to this Annex. Such consultations shall take place within 3 months of the delivery of the request, except in exceptional circumstances or unless the consulting Parties otherwise agree.[17]

2. Consultations shall involve officials responsible for the oversight of the national healthcare authority or officials from each Party responsible for national healthcare programmes and other appropriate government officials.

Paragraph 26-A.5: Definitions

For purposes of this Annex-

national health care authority means, with respect to a Party listed in the schedule to this Annex, the relevant entity or entities specified therein, and with respect to any other Party, an entity that is part of or has been established by a Party’s central level of government to operate a national health care programme;

national health care programme means a health care programme in which a national health care authority makes the determinations or recommendations regarding the listing of pharmaceutical products or medical devices for reimbursement, or regarding the setting the amount of such reimbursement.

Paragraph 26-A.6: Disputes

The dispute settlement procedures provided for in Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to this Annex.

Schedule to Annex 26-A

Further to the definition of national healthcare authorities in Paragraph 26-A.5, national healthcare authorities shall mean:

For Australia: the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC), with respect to PBAC’s role in making determinations in relation to the listing of pharmaceutical products for reimbursement under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.

For Brunei Darussalam: the Ministry of Health. For greater certainty Brunei Darussalam does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

For Canada: The Federal Drug Benefits Committee. For greater certainty, Canada does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

For Chile: the Undersecretary of Public Health. For greater certainty, Chile does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

For Japan: Central Social Insurance Medical Council with respect to its role in making recommendations in relation to the listing or setting amount of reimbursement for new pharmaceutical products.

For Malaysia: the Ministry of Health. For greater certainty, Malaysia does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

For New Zealand: the Pharmaceutical Management Agency (PHARMAC), with respect to PHARMAC’s role in the listing of a new pharmaceutical[18] for reimbursement on the Pharmaceutical Schedule, in relation to formal and duly formulated applications by suppliers in accordance with the Guidelines for Funding Applications to PHARMAC.

For Peru: The Viceministry of Public Health. For greater certainty, Peru does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

For Singapore: the Drug Advisory Committee (DAC) of the Ministry of Health with respect to the DAC’s role in the listing of pharmaceutical products. For greater certainty, Singapore does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

For the United States: The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), with respect to CMS’s role in making Medicare national coverage determinations.

For Viet Nam: the Ministry of Health. For greater certainty, Viet Nam does not currently operate a national healthcare programme within the scope of this Annex.

[1] For the United States, the obligations in Section C shall not apply to conduct outside the jurisdiction of federal criminal law and, to the extent they involve preventive measures, shall apply only to those measures covered by federal law governing federal, state and local officials.

[2] A Party may, consistent with its legal system, comply with its obligations that relate to a proposed regulation in this Article by publishing a policy proposal, discussion document, summary of the regulation or other document that contains sufficient detail to adequately inform interested persons and other Parties about whether and how their trade or investment interests may be affected.

[3] For greater certainty, review need not include merits (de novo) review, and may take the form of common law judicial review. The correction of final administrative actions may include a referral back to the body that took that action.

[4] A Party that is not a party to the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions, including its Annex, done at Paris, November 21, 1997, may satisfy the obligations in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) by establishing the criminal offences described in those subparagraphs in respect of ‘in the exercise of his or her official duties’ rather than ‘in relation to the performance of his or her official duties’.

[5] For greater certainty, a Party may provide in its law that it is not an offence if the advantage was permitted or required by the written laws or regulations of a foreign public official’s country, including case law. The Parties confirm that they are not endorsing those written laws or regulations.

[6] Parties may satisfy the commitment regarding conspiracy through applicable concepts within their legal systems, including asociación ilícita.

[7] For the United States, this commitment applies only to issuers that have a class of securities registered pursuant to 15 U.S.C 78 l or that are otherwise required to file reports pursuant to 15 U.S.C 78o (d).

[8] For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that individual cases or specific discretionary decisions related to the enforcement of anti-corruption laws are subject to each Party’s laws and legal procedures.

[9] For greater certainty, the Parties confirm that the purpose of this Annex is to ensure transparency and procedural fairness of relevant aspects of Parties’ applicable systems relating to pharmaceutical products and medical devices, without prejudice to the obligations in Chapter 26 (Transparency and Anti-corruption), and not to modify a Party’s system of health care in any other respects or a Party’s rights to determine health expenditure priorities.

[10] For purposes of this Annex, each Party shall define the scope of the products subject to its statutes and regulations for pharmaceutical products and medical devices in its territory and make such information publicly available.

[11] This Annex shall not apply to government procurement of pharmaceutical products and medical devices. Where a public entity providing healthcare services engages in government procurement for pharmaceutical products or medical devices, formulary development and management with respect to such activity by the national healthcare authority shall be considered an aspect of such government procurement.

[12] This Annex shall not apply to procedures undertaken for the purpose of post-market subsidisation of pharmaceutical products or medical devices procured by public healthcare entities where the pharmaceutical products or medical devices eligible for consideration are based on the products or devices that are procured by public healthcare entities.

[13] In those cases in which a Party’s national healthcare authority is unable to complete consideration of a proposal within a specified period of time, the Party shall disclose the reason for the delay to the applicant and shall provide for another specified period of time for completing consideration of the proposal.

[14] For greater certainty, each Party may define the persons or entities that qualify as an “applicant” under its laws, regulations, and procedures.

[15] For greater certainty, the review process described in subparagraph (i) may include a review process as described in subparagraph (ii) other than one by the same expert or group of experts.

[16] For greater certainty, subparagraph (e) does not require a Party to provide more than a single review for a request regarding a specific proposal or to review, in conjunction with the request, other proposals or the assessment related to such other proposals. Further, a Party may elect to provide the review specified in subparagraph (e) either with respect to a draft final recommendation or determination, or with respect to a final recommendation or determination.

[17] Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a Party to review or change decisions regarding specific applications.

[18] For the purposes of New Zealand, pharmaceutical means a “medicine” as defined in the Medicines Act 1981 as at the date of signature of this Agreement on behalf of New Zealand.


*************** Chapter 27 ***************

--- Administration and Institutional Provisions ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/7e408703dcbf)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

As the TPP goes into effect, participating governments will need to assess and guide implementation, and address any concerns that may emerge from business, civil society, and government agencies themselves. This chapter sets out the institutional framework enabling them to do so, by establishing the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission, composed by Ministerial or senior level officials, to oversee the implementation of the Agreement; and by defining the tasks the Commission will fulfill, the rules for its decision-making, and other general rules regarding the operation of the Agreement.

Overview

Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission

The Administrative and Institutional Provisions chapter establishes the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission to ensure that the Agreement is properly implemented.

Review of the Agreement

The Commission will review the operation of the Agreement on a periodic basis to ensure that it remains relevant to the challenges confronting the Parties. As in other agreements, the TPP can be modified or amended in the future, but any such modification or amendment would only apply following applicable domestic legal procedures, including Congressional consultation and approval.

Contact Points

The chapter identifies contact points to facilitate communications between the Parties.

Reporting on Progress Related to Transitional Measures

The chapter creates a mechanism through which a Party that has negotiated a specific transition period for an obligation must report on its progress to implement the obligation. This will provide greater transparency with respect to implementation of obligations after the Agreement enters into force, and provide early warning if a Party is not taking the steps necessary to implement its obligations on schedule.

New Features

For the first time in a trade agreement, the TPP requires Parties to report on their plan and progress in implementing those measures for which they have negotiated implementation transition periods. These transition periods support the development objectives of the TPP by providing lower-income TPP countries additional time to build capacity in specific agreed areas. Through the reporting requirements, Parties can monitor progress, address problems, and offer capacity building assistance if needed, ahead of the date for final implementation.

Article 27.1: Establishment of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission

The Parties hereby establish a Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission (Commission) which shall meet at the level of Ministers or senior officials, as mutually determined by the Parties. Each Party shall be responsible for the composition of its delegation.

Article 27.2: Functions of the Commission

1. The Commission shall:

(a) consider any matter relating to the implementation or operation of this Agreement;

(b) review within 3 years of entry into force of this Agreement and at least every 5 years thereafter the economic relationship and partnership among the Parties;

(c) consider any proposal to amend or modify this Agreement;

(d) supervise the work of all committees and working groups established under this Agreement;

(e) establish the Model Rules of Procedure for Arbitral Tribunals referred to in Article 28.11.2 and Article 28.12, and, where appropriate, amend such Model Rules of Procedure for Arbitral Tribunals;

(f) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment between the Parties;

(g) review the roster of panel chairs established under Article 28.10 every 3 years, and when appropriate, constitute a new roster; and

(h) determine whether the Agreement may enter into force for an original signatory notifying pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 30.5.1 (Entry into Force).

2. The Commission may:

(a) establish, refer matters to, or consider matters raised by, any ad hoc or standing committee or working group;

(b) merge or dissolve any subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement in order to improve the functioning of this Agreement;

(c) consider and adopt, subject to completion of any necessary legal procedures by each Party, any modifications of [1]:

(i) the Schedules contained in Annex 2-D (Tariff Elimination), by accelerating tariff elimination;

(ii) the rules of origin established in Annex 3-D (Specific Rules of Origin); or

(iii) the lists of entities and covered goods and services and thresholds contained in each Party’s Annex to Chapter 15 (Government Procurement);

(d) develop arrangements for implementing this Agreement;

(e) seek to resolve differences or disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement;

(f) issue interpretations of the provisions of the Agreement;

(g) seek the advice of non-governmental persons or groups on any matter falling within the Commission’s functions; and

(h) take such other action as the Parties may agree.

3. Pursuant to paragraph 1(b), the Commission shall review the operation of this Agreement with a view to updating and enhancing this Agreement, through negotiations, as appropriate, to ensure that the disciplines contained in the Agreement remain relevant to the trade and investment issues and challenges confronting the Parties.

4. In conducting a review pursuant to paragraph 3, the Commission shall take into account:

(a) the work of all committees, working groups and any other subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement;

(b) relevant developments in international fora; and

(c) as appropriate, input from non-governmental persons or groups of the Parties.

Article 27.3: Decision-Making

1. The Commission and all subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement shall take all decisions by consensus, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, or as the Parties decide otherwise.[2] Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Commission or subsidiary body shall be deemed to have acted by consensus if no Party present at any meeting when a decision is taken objects to the proposed decision.

2. For the purposes of subparagraph (f) of Article 27.2.2 (Functions of the Commission), a decision of the Commission shall be taken by agreement of all Parties. A decision shall be deemed to be reached if a Party which does not indicate agreement when the Commission considers the issue does not object in writing to the interpretation considered by the Commission within 5 days of that consideration.

Article 27.4: Rules of Procedure of the Commission

1. The Commission shall meet within one year of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter as the Parties may decide, including as necessary to fulfil its functions under Article 27.2. Meetings of the Commission shall be chaired successively by each Party.

2. The Party chairing a session of the Commission shall provide any necessary administrative support for such session, and shall notify the Parties of any decision of the Commission.

3. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the Commission and any subsidiary body established under this Agreement shall carry out its work through whatever means are appropriate, which may include electronic mail, videoconferencing or other means.

4. The Commission and any subsidiary body established under this Agreement may establish rules of procedures for the conduct of its work.

Article 27.5: Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate an overall contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement as well as other contact points as required by this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Parties in writing of its designated contact points no later than 60 days from the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party. Each Party shall notify its contact points to any Party for which this Agreement enters into force at a later date, no later than 30 days from the date on which the other Party has notified its contact points.

Article 27.6: Administration of Dispute Settlement Proceedings

1. Each Party shall:

(a) designate an office to provide administrative assistance to the arbitral tribunals established under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) for proceedings in which it is a disputing Party and to perform such related functions as the Commission may direct; and

(b) notify the other Parties of the location of its designated office.

2. Each Party shall be responsible for the operation and costs of its designated office.

Article 27.7: Reporting on Progress Related to Transitional Measures

1. At each regular meeting of the Commission, any Party which has a Party specific transition period for any obligation under this Agreement shall report on its plans for and progress towards implementing the obligation.

2. In addition, any such Party shall provide a written report to the Commission on its plans for and progress towards implementing each such obligation as follows:

(a) for any transition period of three years or less, the Party shall provide a written report six months before the expiration of the transition period;

(b) for any transition period of more than three years, the Party shall provide a yearly written report on the anniversary date of entry into force of this Agreement for it, beginning on the third anniversary, and six months before the expiration of the transition period.

3. Any Party may request additional information regarding a Party’s progress towards achieving implementation. The reporting Party shall promptly reply to such requests.

4. No later than the date on which a transition period expires, a Party with a specific transition period shall provide written notification to the other Parties of what measure it has taken to implement the obligation for which it has a transition period.

5. If a Party fails to provide such notification, the matter shall be automatically placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the Commission. In addition, any Party may request that the Commission meet promptly, by whatever appropriate means, to discuss the matter.

[1] Chile shall implement the actions of the Commission through Acuerdos de Ejecución, in accordance with article 54, numeral 1, fourth paragraph, of the Constitución Política de la República de Chile.

[2] For greater certainty, any such decision on alternative decision-making by Parties shall itself be taken by consensus.


*************** Chapter 28 ***************

--- Dispute Settlement ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/a5b4569a9a55)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

The United States seeks rigorous implementation of agreements we sign and strong mechanisms to enforce U.S. rights when there are failures of implementation. TPP’s Dispute Settlement chapter provides both. It ensures that the dispute settlement system — using tariff retaliation when necessary — applies to the full range of issues covered by the agreement, from market access to labor, environment, services trade, intellectual property rights, and others. And it ensures that the dispute settlement system has strong rules against bias and conflict of interest; is transparent and open to the public; and encourages resolution of complaints when possible through cooperation and consultation. The Dispute Settlement chapter governs disputes between governments. It is unrelated to the Investor-State dispute settlement (ISDS) mechanism, which applies exclusively to commitments in the investment chapter and relates to disputes between private parties and governments.

Overview

Overall Application

The dispute settlement mechanism generally applies across the TPP Agreement, including to obligations under the Labor and Environment chapters, as well as newer disciplines related to cross-border data flows and state-owned enterprises.

Transparency

The Dispute Settlement chapter guarantees the right of the public in each TPP country to follow proceedings, by ensuring that submissions made in a dispute will be made publicly available, hearings will be open to the public, and final decisions by panels will be made publicly available. Further, non-governmental entities will have the right to request making written submissions to panels during disputes.

Cooperation and Alternative Mechanisms

The chapter commits the TPP Parties to make every attempt to resolve disputes through cooperation and consultation, and encourages the use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms where the Parties believe that it would be helpful to resolve a dispute.

Formal Consultations and Panel Review within Specified Timeframes

Under the Dispute Settlement chapter, the first formal step is to hold consultations between the relevant Parties, with a view to early resolution of the issue. In the event that these consultations fail, the dispute can proceed with a Party requesting the establishment a dispute settlement panel tasked with determining whether a Party has failed to comply with its obligations under the Agreement. Specified timeframes are set to ensure an efficient system — a panel may be requested within 60 days after the date of receipt of a request for consultations or 30 days after the date of receipt of a request for perishable goods.

Composition of Panels

Panels will be composed of three objective international trade and subject matter experts. Timeframes for selection of arbitrators will be established, including procedures to ensure that the panel can be composed even if a Party fails to appoint an arbitrator within a set period of time.

Functioning and Integrity of Panels

Clear rules of procedure will guide the functioning of panels and, in particular, ensure the transparency aspects noted above. In addition, panelists will be subject to a code of conduct to be agreed by TPP Parties to ensure the integrity of the dispute settlement mechanism.

Panel Report

Panels must present an initial report to the disputing Parties within 150 days after the last panelist is appointed or 120 days in cases of urgency. That report will be confidential to allow the disputing Parties to review and submit any written comments to the panel. The panel will then issue its final report within 30 days of the presentation of the initial report. The disputing Parties will then be required to release the final report publicly within 15 days thereafter, subject to the protection of any confidential information.

Implementation of the Final Report

In order to maximize compliance with the obligations agreed to, the Dispute Settlement chapter allows for the use of trade retaliation (suspension of benefits or payment of a monetary assessment) if a Party that has been found not to have abided by its obligations fails to fix the problem identified by the panel. Before that may happen, a Party that is found in violation can negotiate or arbitrate a reasonable period of time in which to fix the problem. While the Parties recognize the importance of prompt compliance with panel determinations, nothing in the Agreement can require the United States or other Parties to change a law or regulation.

Private rights

No TPP Party can provide for a private right of action under its domestic law against any other TPP Party for failure to carry out the obligations in the TPP Agreement.

Alternative Dispute Resolution

The chapter encourages use of arbitration and other alternative dispute resolution with respect to private commercial disputes.

New Features

The TPP Agreement provides for more expeditious resolution of disputes, closes various potential loopholes in the existing template that could allow a TPP country to delay or prevent establishing a panel, while also — as in previous U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) — providing for the ability of non-governmental entities to provide written views to panels and ensuring that panel hearings are open to the public. It also requires that Parties to a dispute make their written submissions public — the first time that some TPP Parties will commit to this level of transparency in dispute settlement.

Impact

When the United States negotiates a trade agreement, we expect our trading partners to abide by the rules and obligations agreed. All earlier U.S. trade agreements since the U.S.-Canada agreement of 1989, as well as the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement, have accordingly included a dispute settlement mechanism to adjudicate disputes over compliance.

This is particularly important for the TPP, which creates a wider set of obligations than we have been able to achieve in earlier agreements in areas such e-commerce, labor and environment, state-owned enterprises, and other areas. The TPP dispute settlement mechanism will give us the tools to be able to enforce the strong, high-standard obligations that have been negotiated.

Section A: Dispute Settlement

Article 28.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of a panel pursuant to Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel);

consulting Party means a Party that requests consultations pursuant to Article 28.5.1 (Consultations) and the Party to which the request for consultations is made;

disputing Party means a complaining Party or a responding Party; Panel means a panel established pursuant to Article 28.7 (Establishment of a Panel);

perishable goods means perishable agricultural and fish goods classified in HS Chapters 1 through 24;

responding Party means a Party that has been complained against pursuant to Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel);

Rules of Procedure means the rules referred to in Article 28.12 (Rules of Procedure for Panels) and established in accordance with Article 27.2.1(e) (Functions of the Commission); and

third Party means a Party, other than a disputing Party, that delivers a written notice in accordance with Article 28.13 (Third Party Participation).

Article 28.2: Cooperation

The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might affect its operation.

Article 28.3: Scope

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall apply:

(a) with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement;

(b) wherever a Party considers that an actual or proposed measure of another Party is or would be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or that another Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement; or

(c) wherever a Party considers that a benefit it could reasonably have expected to accrue to it under Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures), Chapter 4 (Textiles and Apparel), Chapter 5 (Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation), Chapter 8 (Technical Barriers to Trade), Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services) or Chapter 15 (Government Procurement) is being nullified or impaired as a result of the application of a measure of another Party that is not inconsistent with this Agreement.

2. No later than 6 months after the effective date when Members of the WTO have the right to initiate non-violation nullification or impairment complaints under Article 64 of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties shall consider whether to amend paragraph 1(c) to include Chapter 18 (Intellectual Property Rights).

3. An instrument entered into by two or more Parties in connection with the conclusion of the Agreement:

(a) does not constitute an instrument related to this Agreement within the meaning of Article 31(2)(b) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties done at Vienna on 23 May 1969 and shall not affect the rights and obligations under this Agreement of Parties not subject to a particular instrument; and

(b) may be subject to the dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter for any matter arising under that instrument if that instrument so provides.

Article 28.4: Choice of Forum

1. Where a dispute regarding any matter arises under this Agreement and under another international trade agreement to which the disputing Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute.

2. Once a complaining Party has requested the establishment of, or referred a matter to, a panel or other panel under an agreement referred to in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of other fora.

Article 28.5: Consultations

1. Any Party may request in writing consultations with any other Party with respect to any matter described in Article 28.3 (Scope). In a request for consultations, the requesting Party shall set out the reasons for the request, including identification of the actual or proposed measure[1] or other matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint. The requesting Party shall circulate the request to all Parties through the Contact Points designated in accordance with Article 27.5 (Contact Points).

2. The Party to which a request for consultations is made shall, unless otherwise mutually agreed, reply to the request in writing within seven days after the date of its receipt. That Party shall circulate the reply to the other Parties and enter into consultations in good faith.

3. A Party other than the Party requesting consultations or the Party to which the request is made that considers it has a substantial interest in the matter may participate in the consultations by delivering a written notice to the other Parties within seven days of the date of delivery of the request for consultation. The Party shall include in its notice an explanation of its substantial interest in the matter.

4. Unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise, they shall enter into consultations within a period of no more than:

(a) 15 days after the date of receipt of the request for matters concerning perishable goods; or

(b) 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for all other matters.

5. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to the consulting Parties. If in person, consultations shall be held in the capital of the Party to which the request for consultations was made under paragraph 1, unless the consulting Parties otherwise agree.

6. The consulting Parties shall make every attempt to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter through consultations under this Article. To this end:

(a) each consulting Party shall provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of how the actual or proposed measure might affect the operation and application of this Agreement; and

(b) any Party participating in the consultations shall treat any confidential information exchanged in the course of consultations on the same basis as the Party providing the information.

7. In consultations under this Article, a consulting Party may request another consulting Party to make available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have expertise in the matter subject to consultations.

8. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of any Party in any further proceedings.

Article 28.6: Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

1. Parties may at any time agree to voluntarily undertake an alternative method of dispute resolution such as good offices, conciliation or mediation.

2. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation or mediation shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the Parties in any other proceedings.

3. Parties participating in proceedings under this Article may suspend or terminate such proceedings at any time.

4. If the disputing Parties agree, good offices, conciliation or mediation may continue while the dispute proceeds for resolution before a panel convened under Article 28.7 (Establishment of a Panel).

Article 28.7: Establishment of a Panel

1. A Party that requested consultations pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 28.5 (Consultations) may request, by means of a written notification addressed to the responding Party, the establishment of a panel if the consulting Parties fail to resolve the matter within:

(a) 60 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations under Article 28.5.1;

(b) 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations under Article 28.5.1 in a matter regarding perishable goods; or

(c) such other period as the consulting Parties may agree.

2. At the same time, the complaining Party shall circulate the request to all Parties through the contact points designated in accordance with Article 27.5 (Contact Points).

3. The complaining Party shall include in the request to establish a panel an identification of the measure or other matter at issue and a brief summary of the legal basis of the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.

4. A panel shall be established upon delivery of a request.

5. Unless otherwise agreed by the disputing Parties, the panel shall be composed in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and the Rules of Procedure.

6. Where a panel has been established regarding a matter and another Party requests the establishment of a panel regarding the same matter, a single panel should be established to examine such complaints whenever feasible.

8. A panel may not be established to review a proposed measure.

Article 28.8: Terms of Reference

1. Unless the disputing Parties otherwise agree within 20 days from the date of delivery of the request for the establishment of the panel, the terms of reference shall be to:

(a) examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of a panel pursuant to Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel); and

(b) make findings and determinations, and any requested recommendations, together with its reasons therefor, as provided for in Article 28.16.4 (Initial Report).

2. If, in its panel request, a complaining Party has claimed that a measure nullifies or impairs benefits in the sense of Article 28.3(c) (Scope), the terms of reference shall so indicate.

Article 28.9: Composition of Panels

1. The panel shall comprise three members.

2. Unless they otherwise agree, the disputing Parties shall apply the following procedures in selecting a panel:

(a) Within 20 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of a panel under Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel), the complaining Party or Parties, on the one hand, and the responding Party, on the other, shall appoint a panellist and notify each other of those appointments.

(b) If the complaining Party or Parties fail to appoint a panellist within the period specified in subparagraph (a), the dispute settlement proceedings shall lapse at the end of that period.

(c) If the responding Party fails to appoint a panellist within the period set out in subparagraph (a), the panellist not yet appointed shall be chosen by the complaining Party or Parties:

(i) from the responding Party’s list established under Article 28.10.11 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members); or

(ii) where the responding Party has not established a list under Article 28.10.11 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), from the roster of panel chairs established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members); or

(iii) where no roster of panel chairs has been established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), by random selection from a list of three candidates nominated by the complaining Party or Parties.

within 35 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of a panel under Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel).

(d) For appointment of the chair of the panel:

(i) the disputing Parties shall endeavour to agree on the appointment of a chair of the panel;

(ii) if the disputing Parties fail to appoint a chair pursuant to subparagraph (d)(i) by the time the second panellist has been appointed or within 35 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of a panel under Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel), whichever is longer, the two panellists appointed shall, by common agreement, appoint the third panelist from the roster established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members). The third panellist shall serve as chair.

(iii) If the two panellists do not agree to the third panellist under subparagraph (d)(ii) within 43 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of a panel under Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel), then the two panellists shall make the appointment with the agreement of the disputing Parties.

(iv) If the two panellists fail to appoint the chair of the panel in accordance with subparagraph (d)(iii) within 55 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of the panel, the disputing Parties shall select the third panellist by random selection from the roster established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members) within 60 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of the panel.

(ivbis) Notwithstanding paragraph 9.2(d)(iv), where the two panellists fail to appoint the chair of the panel in accordance with paragraph 9.2(d)(iii) within 55 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of the panel, either disputing Party may elect to have the chair of the panel be appointed by an independent third party from the roster established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), provided that the following conditions are met:

(A) Any costs associated with such appointment are borne by the electing Party;

(B) The request to the independent third party to appoint the chair of the panel shall be made jointly by the disputing Parties. Any subsequent communication between either disputing Party and the independent third party shall be copied to the other disputing Party. Neither disputing Party shall have any influence on the appointment process;

(C) Where the third party is unable or unwilling to complete the appointment as requested within 60 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of the panel, then the chair of the panel shall be chosen within a further 5 days using the random selection process set out in paragraph 9.2(d)(iv).

(v) If a roster has not been established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), and subparagraphs 2(d)(i) — (iv) cannot apply, the complaining Party or Parties, on the one hand, and the responding Party, on the other hand, may nominate three candidates and the third panellist shall be randomly selected from those candidates that have been nominated within 60 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of a panel under Article 28.7.1 (Establishment of a Panel).

(vbis) Notwithstanding paragraph (9)(2)(d)(v), where a roster has not been established pursuant to Article 28.10.3 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), and subparagraphs 2(d)(i) to (v) cannot apply, either disputing Party may, following the nomination of candidates pursuant to paragraph 9.2(d)(v), elect to have the chair of the Panel be appointed by an independent third party from those candidates that have been nominated, providing that the following conditions have been met:

(A) Any costs associated with such appointment are borne by the electing Party;

(B) The request to the independent third party to appoint the chair of the panel shall be made jointly by the disputing Parties. Any subsequent communication between either disputing Party and the independent third party shall be copied to the other disputing Party. Neither disputing Party shall have any influence on the

appointment process;

(C) Where the third party is unable or unwilling to complete the appointment as requested within 60 days of the delivery of the request for the establishment of the panel, then the chair of the panel shall be chosen within a further 5 days using the random selection process set out in paragraph 9.2(d)(v).

Unless agreed otherwise by the disputing Parties, the chair of the panel shall not be a national of any of the disputing Parties or a third Party.

3. Except in the case of a dispute arising under Chapter 19 (Labour), 20 (Environment), or 26 (Transparency and Anti-corruption) each disputing Party shall endeavour to select panellists who have expertise or experience relevant to the subject matter of the dispute.

4. In addition to the requirements set out in Article 28.10.1 (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), in any dispute arising under Chapter 20 (Environment), panellists other than those selected from the Roster or appointed under paragraph 9.2(d)(i)-(iii) and (v) shall have expertise or experience in environmental law or practice.

5. In addition to the requirements set out in Article 28.10.1 (Qualification of Panellists), in any dispute arising under Chapter 19 (Labour), panellists other than those selected from the Roster or appointed under paragraph 9.2(d)(i)-(iii) and (v) shall have expertise or experience in labour law or practice.

6. In addition to the requirements set out in Article 28.10.1 (Qualification of Panellists), in any dispute arising under section B of Chapter 26 (Transparency and Anti-corruption), panellists other than those selected from the Roster or appointed under paragraph 9.2(d)(i)-(iii) and (v) shall have expertise or experience in anti-corruption law or practice.

7. If a panellist selected under paragraph 9.2(c) or 9.2(d)(iv) is unable to serve on the panel, the disputing Parties shall meet within seven days of learning that the panellist is unavailable to select another panellist from among the remaining members of the list (in the case of paragraph 9.2(c)) or the roster (in the case of paragraph 9.2(d)(iv)).

8. If a panellist appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable to serve on the panel, either during the course of the proceeding or at such time as the panel is reconvened pursuant to Article 28.19 (Non-Implementation — Compensation and Suspension of Benefits) or 28.20 (Compliance Review), a replacement panellist shall be appointed within 15 days in accordance with the selection procedures prescribed in paragraph 2 for the appointment of the original panellist and the replacement shall have all the powers and duties of the original panellist. The work of the panel shall be suspended pending the appointment of the replacement panellist, and all relevant time-frames set out in this Chapter and in the Rules of Procedure shall be extended by the amount of time that the work was suspended.

9. If a disputing Party believes that a panellist is in violation of the code of conduct referred to in Article 28.10(1)(d) (Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members), the disputing Parties shall consult and, if they agree, that panellist shall be removed and a new panellist shall be selected in accordance with this Article.

Article 28.10: Qualification of Panellists and Roster Members

Qualification of Panellists

1. All panellists shall:

(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement, or the resolution of disputes arising under international trade agreements;

(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound judgment;

(c) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions from, any Party; and

(d) comply with the code of conduct contained in the Rules of Procedure.

2. An individual may not serve as a panellist for a dispute in which he or she has participated pursuant to Article 28.6 (Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation).

Roster of Panel Chairs

3. Within 120 days of entry into force of this Agreement, those Parties for whom the agreement has come into force pursuant to Article 30.5.1(a) (Entry into Force) shall establish a roster of panel chairs.

4. If the Parties have been unable to establish a roster within the time specified in paragraph 3, the Commission shall convene immediately to appoint individuals to the roster. Taking into account the nominations made pursuant to paragraph 6 and the qualifications set out in paragraph 1, the Commission shall issue a joint decision establishing the roster within 180 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

5. The roster shall consist of at least 15 individuals, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

6. Each Party may nominate up to two individuals for the roster, which may include up to one national of any Party.

7. The Parties shall appoint individuals to the roster by consensus. The roster may include up to one national of each Party.

8. Once established pursuant to paragraph 3 or if reconstituted following a review by the Parties, a roster shall remain in effect for a minimum of three years, and shall remain in effect thereafter until the Parties constitute a new roster. Members of the roster may be reappointed.

9. The Parties may appoint a replacement at any time if a roster member is no longer willing or available to serve.

10. Subject to paragraphs 6 and 7, acceding Parties may nominate up to two individuals for the roster at any time who, thereafter, may be included on the roster by consensus of the Parties.

Party Specific Indicative List

11. At any time after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, a Party may establish a list of individuals who are willing and able to serve as panellists.

12. This list may include individuals who are nationals of that Party or non-nationals. Each Party may appoint any number of individuals to the list and appoint additional individuals or replace the list member at any time.

13. A Party which establishes a list in accordance with paragraph 11 of this Article shall promptly make it available to the other Parties.

Article 28.11: Functions of Panels

1. The function of a panel is to make an objective assessment of the matter before it, including an examination of the facts of the case and the applicability of and conformity with this Agreement, and make such findings, determinations and recommendations as are called for in its terms of reference and necessary for the resolution of the dispute.

2. Unless otherwise agreed by the disputing Parties, the panel shall perform its functions and conduct its proceedings in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and the Rules of Procedure.

3. The panel shall consider this Agreement in accordance with applicable rules of interpretation under international law as reflected in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969). In addition, with respect to any obligation of any WTO agreement that has been incorporated into this Agreement, the panel shall also consider relevant interpretations in reports of panels and the WTO Appellate Body adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body. The findings, determinations and recommendations of the panel shall not add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties under this Agreement.

4. A panel shall take its decisions by consensus; provided that where a panel is unable to reach consensus it may take its decisions by majority vote.

Article 28.12: Rules of Procedure for Panels

1. The Rules of Procedure, as established under this Agreement in accordance with Article 27.2.1(e), shall ensure:

(a) a right to at least one hearing before the panel at which each disputing Party may present views orally;

(b) that, subject to subparagraph (f), any hearing before the panel shall be open to the public, unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise;

(c) an opportunity for each disputing Party to provide an initial and a rebuttal written submission;

(d) that, subject to paragraph (f), each disputing Party shall make its best efforts to release to the public any written submission, written version of an oral statement, and written response to a request or question from the panel, as soon as possible after they are filed and, if not already released, will release all such documents by the time the final panel report is issued;

(e) that the panel shall consider requests from non-governmental entities located in the territory of any disputing Party to provide written views regarding the dispute that may assist the panel in evaluating the submissions and arguments of the disputing Parties;

(f) the protection of confidential information;

(g) that written submissions and oral arguments shall be made in English, unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise; and

(h) that unless otherwise agreed by the disputing Parties, hearings shall be held in the capital of the responding Party.

Article 28.13: Third Party Participation

A Party that is not a disputing Party and that considers it has an interest in the matter before the panel shall, on delivery of a written notice to the disputing Parties, be entitled to attend all hearings, to make written submissions, to present views orally to the panel, and to receive written submissions of the disputing Parties. Such delivery shall occur no later than 10 days after the date of circulation of the request for the establishment of the panel pursuant to Article 28.7.2 (Establishment of a Panel).

Article 28.14: Role of Experts

At the request of a disputing Party or on its own initiative, the panel may seek information and technical advice from any person or body that it deems appropriate, provided that the disputing Parties so agree and subject to such terms and conditions as the disputing Parties may agree. The disputing Parties shall have an opportunity to comment on any information or advice so obtained.

Article 28.15: Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

1. The panel may suspend its work at any time at the request of the complaining Party or, if there is more than one complaining Party, at the joint request of the complaining Parties for a period not to exceed 12 consecutive months. The panel shall suspend its work at any time if the disputing Parties so request. In the event of such a suspension, all relevant time-frames set out in this Chapter and in the Rules of Procedure shall be extended by the amount of time that the work was suspended. If the work of the panel has been suspended for more than 12 consecutive months, the authority for establishment of the panel shall lapse unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise.

2. The panel shall terminate its proceedings where the disputing Parties jointly request it to do so.

Article 28.16: Initial Report

1. The report of the panel shall be drafted without the presence of any Party.

2. The panel shall base its report on the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the submissions and arguments of the disputing Parties and any third Parties, and on any information or advice put before it pursuant to Article 28.14 (Role of Experts). At the joint request of the disputing Parties, the panel may make recommendations for the resolution of the dispute.

3. The panel shall present to the disputing Parties an initial report within 150 days after the last panellist is appointed. In cases of urgency, including those related to perishable goods, the panel shall endeavour to do so within 120 days after the last panellist is appointed.

4. The initial report shall contain:

(a) findings of fact;

(b) the determination of the panel as to whether:

(i) the measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations under this Agreement;

(ii) a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement; or

(iii) a disputing Party’s measure is causing nullification or impairment in the sense of Article 28.3(c) (Scope);

(c) any other determination requested in the terms of reference;

(d) recommendations, if the disputing Parties have jointly requested them, for resolution of the dispute; and

(e) the reasons for the findings and determinations.

5. In exceptional cases, if the panel considers it cannot release its initial report within 150 days, or within 120 days in cases of urgency, it shall inform the disputing Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within which it will issue its report. Any delay shall not exceed a further period of 30 days unless the disputing Parties otherwise agree.

6. Panellists may furnish separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed.

7. A disputing Party may submit written comments to the panel on its initial report within 15 days of the presentation of the report or within such other period as the disputing Parties may agree.

8. After considering any written comments by the disputing Parties on the initial report, the panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.

Article 28.17: Final Report

1. The panel shall present a final report to the disputing Parties, including any separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed, within 30 days of presentation of the initial report, unless the disputing Parties otherwise agree. The disputing Parties shall release the final report to the public within 15 days thereafter, subject to the protection of confidential information.

2. No panel may, either in its initial report or its final report, disclose which panellists are associated with majority or minority opinions.

Article 28.18: Implementation of Final Report

1. The Parties recognize the importance of prompt compliance with determinations made by panels under Article 28.17 (Final Report) in achieving the aim of the dispute settlement procedures of this chapter, which is to secure a positive solution to disputes

2. If in its final report the panel determines that:

(a) a measure at issue is inconsistent with a Party’s obligations under this Agreement;

(b) a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement; or

(c) a Party’s measure is causing nullification or impairment in the sense of Article 28.3(c) (Scope);

the responding Party shall, whenever possible, eliminate the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment.

3. Unless the disputing Parties decide otherwise, the responding Party shall have a reasonable period of time in which to eliminate the non-conformity or nullification or impairment if it is not practicable to comply immediately.

4. The disputing Parties shall endeavour to agree on the reasonable period of time. Where the disputing Parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time within 45 days of the presentation of the panel’s report under Article 28.17.1 (Final Report), any disputing Party may, within 60 days of the presentation of the panel’s report under Article 28.17.1 (Final Report), refer the matter to the panel chair to determine the reasonable period of time through arbitration.

5. The panel chair shall take into consideration as a guideline that the reasonable period of time should not exceed 15 months from the presentation of the panel’s final report to the disputing Parties under Article 28.17.1 (Final Report). However, that time may be shorter or longer, depending upon the particular circumstances.

6. The panel chair shall determine the reasonable period of time within 90 days of the date of referral to the panel chair pursuant to subparagraph 4.

7. The disputing Parties may agree to vary the procedures set out in paragraphs 4 to 6 of this article for the determination of the reasonable period of time.

Article 28.19: Non-Implementation — Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. The responding Party shall, if so requested by the complaining Party or Parties, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party or Parties within 15 days of receipt of such request, with a view to developing mutually acceptable compensation, in circumstances where:

a) the responding Party has notified the complaining Party or Parties that it does not intend to eliminate the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment; or

b) following the expiry of the reasonable period of time established in accordance with Article 28.18 (Implementation of Final Report), there is disagreement between the disputing Parties as to whether the responding Party has eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment;

2. A complaining Party may suspend benefits in accordance with paragraph 2bis if that complaining Party and the responding Party have:

(a) been unable to agree on compensation within 30 days after the period for developing such compensation has begun; or

(b) agreed on compensation but the relevant complaining Party considers that the responding Party has failed to observe the terms of the agreement.

2bis. A complaining Party may, at any time after the conditions set out in paragraph 2 are met in relation to that complaining Party, provide written notice to the responding Party that it intends to suspend the application to the responding Party of benefits of equivalent effect. The notice shall specify the level of benefits that the Party proposes to suspend. [2] The complaining Party may begin suspending benefits 30 days after the later of the date on which it provides notice under this paragraph or the panel issues its determination under paragraph 5, as the case may be.

3. Compensation and the suspension of benefits and the payment of a monetary assessment shall be temporary measures. None of these measures is preferred to full implementation through elimination of the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment. Compensation, and suspension of benefits and the payment of a monetary assessment shall only be applied until such time as the responding Party has eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment, or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.

4. In considering what benefits to suspend pursuant to paragraph 2, the complaining Party shall apply the following principles and procedures:

(a) it should first seek to suspend benefits in the same subject matter as that in which the panel has determined non-conformity or nullification or impairment to exist;

(b) if it considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend benefits in the same subject matter and that the circumstances are serious enough, it may suspend benefits in a different subject matter. The communication pursuant to paragraph 2 in which it announces such a decision shall indicate the reasons on which it is based; and

(c) in applying the principles set out in subparagraphs (a) and (b), the complaining Party shall take into account:

(i) the trade in the good, the supply of the service or other subject matter in which the panel has found the non-conformity or nullification or impairment, and the importance of such trade to that Party;

(ii) that goods, all financial services covered under Chapter 11 (Financial Services), services other than such financial services and each section in Chapter 18 (Intellectual Property), are each distinct subject matters; and

(iii) the broader economic elements related to the nullification or impairment and the broader economic consequences of the suspension of benefits.

5. If the responding Party considers that:

(a) the level of benefits proposed to be suspended is manifestly excessive or the complaining Party has failed to follow the principles and procedures set out in paragraph 4; or

(b) it has eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment that the panel has determined to exist;

it may, within 30 days after the complaining Party provides notice under paragraph 2, request that the panel be reconvened to consider the matter. The responding Party shall deliver its request in writing to the complaining Party. The panel shall reconvene as soon as possible after delivery of the request and shall present its determination to the disputing Parties within 90 days after it reconvenes to review a request under subparagraph (a) or (b), or within 120 days for a request under subparagraphs (a) and (b). If the panel determines that the level of benefits proposed to be suspended is manifestly excessive, it shall determine the level of benefits it considers to be of equivalent effect.

6. Unless the panel has determined that the responding Party has eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment, the complaining Party may suspend benefits up to the level the panel has determined under paragraph 5 or, if the panel has not determined the level, the level the complaining Party has proposed to suspend under paragraph 2bis. If the panel determines that the complaining Party has not followed the principles and procedures set out in paragraph 4, the panel shall set out in its award the extent to which the complaining Party may suspend benefits in which subject matter in order to ensure full compliance with the principles and procedures set out in paragraph 4. The complaining Party may suspend benefits only in a manner consistent with the panellist’s award.

7. The complaining Party may not suspend benefits if, within 30 days after it provides written notice of intent to suspend benefits or, if the p is reconvened under paragraph 5, within 20 days after the panel provides its determination, the responding Party provides written notice to the complaining Party that it will pay a monetary assessment. The disputing Parties shall consult, beginning no later than ten days after the responding Party, with a view to reaching agreement on the amount of the assessment. If the Parties are unable to reach an agreement within 30 days after consultations begin and are not engaged in discussions regarding the use of a fund under paragraph 8, the amount of the assessment shall be set at a level, in U.S. dollars, equal to 50 percent of the level of the benefits the panel has determined under paragraph 5 to be of equivalent effect or, if the panel has not determined the level, 50 percent of the level that the complaining Party has proposed to suspend under paragraph 2.

8. If a monetary assessment is to be paid to the complaining Party, then it shall be paid in U.S. currency, or in an equivalent amount of the currency of the responding Party or in another currency agreed to by the disputing Parties in equal, quarterly installments beginning 60 days after the responding Party gives notice that it intends to pay an assessment. Where the circumstances warrant, the disputing Parties may decide that an assessment shall be paid into a fund designated by the disputing Parties for appropriate initiatives to facilitate trade between the Parties, including by further reducing unreasonable trade barriers or by assisting carrying out its obligations under this Agreement.

9. At the same time as the payment of its first quarterly installment, the responding Party shall provide to the complaining Party a plan of the steps it intends to take to eliminate the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment.

10. A responding Party may pay a monetary assessment in lieu of suspension of benefits for a maximum of 12 months from the date on which it has provided written notice under paragraph 7 unless the complaining Party agrees to an extension.

11. A responding Party seeking an extension shall make a written request no later than 30 days before the expiration of the 12 month period. The disputing Parties shall determine the length and terms of any extension, including the amount of the assessment.

12. The complaining Party may suspend the application to the responding Party of benefits in accordance with paragraph 6, if:

(a) the responding Party fails to make a payment or fails to make the payment under paragraph 13 after electing to do so;

(b) the responding Party fails to provide the plan as required under paragraph 9; or

(c) the monetary assessment period, including any extension, has elapsed and the responding Party has not yet eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment.

13. If the responding Party notified the complaining Party under paragraph 7 regarding the possible use of a fund and the disputing Parties have not agreed on the use of a fund within 3 months of the date of the responding Party’s notice, and this time period has not been extended by agreement of the disputing Parties, the responding Party may elect to make the monetary assessment payment equal to 50 per cent of the amount determined under paragraph 5. If this election is made the payment must be made within nine months of the responding Party’s notice under paragraph 7 in U.S. currency, or in an equivalent amount of the currency of the responding Party or in another currency agreed to by the disputing Parties. If the election is not made, the complaining Party may suspend the application of benefits in the amount determined under paragraph 5 at the end of the election period.

14. The complaining Party shall accord sympathetic consideration to the notice by the responding Party regarding the possible use of the fund referred to in paragraphs 8 and 13.

Article 28.20: Compliance Review

1. Without prejudice to the procedures in Article 28.19 (Non-Implementation — Compensation and Suspension of Benefits), if the responding Party considers that it has eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment found by the panel, it may refer the matter to the panel by providing written notice to the complaining Party or Parties. The panel shall issue its report on the matter within 90 days after the responding Party provides notice.

2. If the panel decides that the responding Party has eliminated the non-conformity or the nullification or impairment, the complaining Party or Parties shall promptly reinstate any benefits suspended under Article 28.19 (Non-Implementation — Compensation and Suspension of Benefits).

Section B: Domestic Proceedings and Private Commercial Dispute Settlement

Article 28.21: Private Rights

No Party may provide for a right of action under its domestic law against any other Party on the ground that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement, or that the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement.

Article 28.22: Alternative Dispute Resolution

1. Each Party shall, to the maximum extent possible, encourage and facilitate the use of arbitration and other means of alternative dispute resolution for the settlement of international commercial disputes between private parties in the free trade area.

2. To this end, each Party shall provide appropriate procedures to ensure observance of agreements to arbitrate and for the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards in such disputes.

3. A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraph 2 if it is a party to and is in compliance with the 1958 United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.

[1] Parties shall, in the case of proposed measures, make every effort to make any request under this provision within 60 days of the publication of the proposed measure, without prejudice to the right to make such requests at any time

[2] For greater certainty, the phrase “the level of benefits that the Party proposes to suspend” refers to the level of concessions under this Agreement the suspension of which a complaining Party considers will have an effect equivalent to that of the non-conformity, or nullification or impairment in the sense of Article 28.3(c) (Scope), determined to exist by the panel in its final report issued under Article 28.17.1 (Final Report).


*************** Chapter 29 ***************

--- Exceptions ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/1299fbf34b76)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs

The General Exceptions chapter ensures that flexibilities are available to the United States and the other TPP Parties that guarantee the full right to regulate in the public interest, including for national security and other policy reasons.

Overview

The Exceptions chapter ensures that exceptions to the TPP obligations are available for public interest regulation, national security, and other policies a Party considers necessary, paralleling the exceptions contained in our earlier trade agreements.

General Exceptions

The Exceptions chapter incorporates the general exceptions provided for in Article XX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to the “goods trade” related provisions. This provides treatment parallel to what we are provided in the WTO, which specifies that “nothing in this agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement” of policies to, among other things, protect public morals, protect human, plant, or animal life and health, enforce intellectual property rules against counterfeiting, enforce laws relating to imports of products of prison labor, and conserve exhaustible resources. The chapter contains the similar general exceptions provided for in Article XIV of the General Agreement on Trade in Services with respect to the “services trade” related provisions.

Essential Security Exception

The Exceptions chapter includes an exception, applicable to the entire Agreement, making clear that a Party may take any measure it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests.

Taxation Exception

The chapter ensures that only specific provisions of the TPP Agreement apply to taxation measures.

Temporary Safeguard Measures The chapter defines circumstances and conditions under which a Party may impose temporary safeguard measures restricting transfers — such as contributions to capital, transfers of profits and dividends, payments of interest or royalties, and payments under a contract — related to covered investments. The exception is important to ensure that governments retain the flexibility to manage volatile capital flows, including permitting countries to impose temporary safeguard measures or capital controls restricting investment-related transfers in the context of a balance of payments crisis, or certain other economic crises, subject to certain conditions and disciplines.

Tobacco Control Measures

Tobacco is a product that poses unique public health challenges, as is reflected in each Party’s tobacco control regulations. In order to ensure that each Party has the ability to regulate manufactured tobacco products and protect public health, TPP, for the first time in any trade agreement, builds on structures established in the agreement to give each Party the right to decide that its tobacco control measures for manufactured tobacco products cannot be challenged by private investors under Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS). Other provisions of the agreement, including state-tostate dispute settlement procedures by governments, will continue to apply. This provision does not apply to tobacco leaf; under TPP, U.S. tobacco farmers will have enhanced opportunities to compete fairly in foreign markets by the elimination of foreign tariffs on tobacco leaf.

Disclosure of Information

A basic rule clarifies that no Party is obligated to provide information under the Agreement if it would be contrary to its law or public interest, or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises.

Impact

U.S. free trade agreements and World Trade Organization rules open markets to American goods and services, while also providing explicit assurance that governments remain free to regulate for the public interest in areas such as public health, environmental protection, national security, public morals, and others. This has been standard practice in all U.S. trade agreements dating to the first multilateral trade agreement in 1947, and is the case in TPP.

Section A: Exceptions

Article 29.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures), Chapter 4 (Textiles and Apparel), Chapter 5 (Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation), Chapter 7 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), Chapter 8 (Technical Barriers to Trade) and Chapter 17 (State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), Article XX of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.[1]

2. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, and that Article XX(g) of GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living and non-living exhaustible natural resources.

3. For the purposes of Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), Chapter 12 (Temporary Entry for Business Persons), Chapter 13 (Telecommunications), Chapter 14 (Electronic Commerce)[2], and Chapter 17 (State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article XIV of GATS are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.[3] The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV(b) of GATS include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking action, including maintaining or increasing a customs duty, that is authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO or is taken as a result of a decision by a dispute settlement panel under a free trade agreement to which the Party taking action and the Party against which the action is taken are party.

Article 29.2: Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) require a Party to furnish or allow access to any information the disclosure of which it determines to be contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers necessary for the fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or the protection of its own essential security interests.

Article 29.3: Temporary Safeguard Measures

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining restrictive measures with regard to payments or transfers for current account transactions in the event of serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties or threats thereof.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining restrictive measures with regard to payments or transfers relating to the movements of capital:

(a) in the event of serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties or threats thereof; or

(b) if, in exceptional circumstances, payments or transfers relating to capital movements cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for macroeconomic management.

3. Any measure adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 or 2 shall:

(a) not be inconsistent with Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.3 (National Treatment) and Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment);[4]

(b) be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

(c) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests of any other Party;

(d) not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in paragraph 1 or 2;

(e) be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situations specified in paragraph 1 or 2 improve, and shall not exceed 18 months in duration; however, in exceptional circumstances, a Party may extend such measure for additional periods of one year, by notifying the other Parties in writing within 30 days of the extension, unless after consultations more than one half of the Parties advise, in writing, within 30 days of receiving the notification that they do not agree that the extended measure is designed and applied to satisfy subparagraphs (c), (d) and (h), in which case the Party imposing the measure shall remove the measure, or otherwise modify the measure to bring it into conformity with subparagraphs (c), (d) and (h), taking into account the views of the other Parties, within 90 days of receiving notification that more than one half of the Parties do not agree;

(f) not be inconsistent with Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation);[5]

(g) in the case of restrictions on capital outflows, not interfere with investors’ ability to earn a market rate of return in the territory of the restricting Party on any restricted assets;[6] and

(h) not be used to avoid necessary macroeconomic adjustment.

4. Measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to payments or transfers relating to foreign direct investment.[7]

5. A Party shall endeavour to provide that any measures adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 or 2 be price-based, and if such measures are not price-based, the Party shall explain the rationale for using quantitative restrictions when it notifies the other Parties of the measure.

6. In the case of trade in goods, Article XII of GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Balance of Payments Provisions of the GATT 1994 are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis. Any measures adopted or maintained under this paragraph shall not impair the relative benefits accorded to the other Parties under this Agreement as compared to the treatment of a non-Party.

7. A Party adopting or maintaining measures under paragraph 1, 2 or 6 shall:

(a) notify, in writing, the other Parties of the measures, including any changes therein, along with the rationale for their imposition, within 30 days of their adoption;

(b) present, as soon as possible, either a time schedule or the conditions necessary for their removal;

(c) promptly publish the measures; and

(d) promptly commence consultations with the other Parties in order to review the measures adopted or maintained by it.

(i) In the case of capital movements, promptly respond to any other Party that requests consultations in relation to the measures adopted by it, provided that such consultations are not otherwise taking place outside of this Agreement.

(ii) In the case of current account restrictions, if consultations in relation to the measures adopted by it are not taking place under the framework of the WTO Agreement, a Party, if requested, shall promptly commence consultations with any interested Party.

Article 29.4: Taxation Measures

1. For the purposes of this Article:

designated authorities means:

(a) for Australia, the Secretary to the Treasury or an authorised representative of the Secretary;

(b) for Brunei Darussalam, the Minister of Finance or the Minister’s authorised representative;

(c) for Canada, the Assistant Deputy Minister for Tax Policy, Department of Finance;

(d) for Chile, the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Finance (Subsecretario de Hacienda);

(e) for Japan, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Finance;[8]

(f) for Malaysia, the Minister of Finance or the Minister’s authorised representative;

(g) for Mexico, the Minister of Finance and Public Credit (Secretario de Hacienda y Crédito Público);

(h) for New Zealand, the Commissioner of Inland Revenue or an authorised representative of the Commissioner;

(i) for Peru, the General Director of International Economy, Competition and Productivity Affairs (Director General de Asuntos de Economía Internacional, Competencia y Productividad del Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas);

(j) for Singapore, the Chief Tax Policy Officer, Ministry of Finance;

(k) for the United States, the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Tax Policy); and

(l) for Viet Nam, the Minister of Finance,

or any successor of these designated authorities as notified in writing to the other Parties;

tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation or other international taxation agreement or arrangement; and

taxes and taxation measures include excise duties, but do not include:

(a) a “customs duty” as defined in Article 1.3 (General Definitions); or

(b) the measures listed in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of that definition.

2. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation measures.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such tax convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

4. In the case of a tax convention between two or more Parties, if an issue arises as to whether any inconsistency exists between this Agreement and the tax convention, the issue shall be referred to the designated authorities of the Parties in question. The designated authorities of those Parties shall have six months from the date of referral of the issue to make a determination as to the existence and extent of any inconsistency. If those designated authorities agree, the period may be extended up to 12 months from the date of referral of the issue. No procedures concerning the measure giving rise to the issue may be initiated under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) or Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) until the expiry of the six-month period, or any other period as may have been agreed by the designated authorities. A panel or tribunal established to consider a dispute related to a taxation measure shall accept as binding a determination of the designated authorities of the Parties made under this paragraph.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 3:

(a) Article 2.3 (National Treatment) and such other provisions of this Agreement as are necessary to give effect to that Article shall apply to taxation measures to the same extent as does Article III of GATT 1994; and

(b) Article 2.16 (Export Duties, Taxes or other Charges) shall apply to taxation measures.

6. Subject to paragraph 3:

(a) Article 10.3 (National Treatment) and Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) shall apply to taxation measures on income, on capital gains, on the taxable capital of corporations, or on the value of an investment or property[9] (but not on the transfer of that investment or property), that relate to the purchase or consumption of particular services, except that nothing in this subparagraph shall prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage that relates to the purchase or consumption of particular services on requirements to provide the service in its territory;

(b) Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.3 (National Treatment), Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.6.1 (Cross-Border Trade) and Article 14.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products) shall apply to all taxation measures, other than those on income, on capital gains, on the taxable capital of corporations, on the value of an investment or property[10] (but not on the transfer of that investment or property), or taxes on estates, inheritances, gifts and generation-skipping transfers; and

(c) Article 14.4 (Non-Discriminatory Treatment of Digital Products) shall apply to taxation measures on income, on capital gains, on the taxable income of corporations, or on the value of an investment or property (but not on the transfer of that investment or property), that relate to the purchase or consumption of particular digital products, except that nothing in this subparagraph shall prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage relating to the purchase or consumption of particular digital products on requirements to provide the digital product in its territory,

but nothing in the Articles referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) shall apply to:

(d) any most-favoured-nation obligation with respect to an advantage accorded by a Party pursuant to a tax convention;

(e) a non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure;

(f) the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure;

(g) an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure to the extent that the amendment does not decrease its conformity, at the time of the amendment, with any of those Articles;

(h) the adoption or enforcement of any new taxation measure aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of taxes, including any taxation measure that differentiates between persons based on their place of residence for tax purposes, provided that the taxation measure does not arbitrarily discriminate between persons, goods or services of the Parties;[11]

(i) a provision that conditions the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage relating to the contributions to, or income of, a pension trust, pension plan, superannuation fund or other arrangement to provide pension, superannuation or similar benefits, on a requirement that the Party maintain continuous jurisdiction, regulation or supervision over that trust, plan, fund or other arrangement; or

(j) any excise duty on insurance premiums to the extent that such tax would, if levied by the other Parties, be covered by subparagraph (e), (f) or (g).

7. Subject to paragraph 3, and without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under paragraph 5, Article 9.9.2 (Performance Requirements), Article 9.9.3 and Article 9.9.5 shall apply to taxation measures.

8. Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation) shall apply to taxation measures. However, no investor may invoke Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation) as the basis for a claim if it has been determined pursuant to this paragraph that the measure is not an expropriation. An investor that seeks to invoke Article 9.7 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect to a taxation measure must first refer to the designated authorities of the Party of the investor and the respondent Party, at the time that it gives its notice of intent under Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), the issue of whether that taxation measure is not an expropriation. If the designated authorities do not agree to consider the issue or, having agreed to consider it, fail to agree that the measure is not an expropriation within a period of six months of the referral, the investor may submit its claim to arbitration under Article 9.18 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

9. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Singapore from adopting taxation measures no more trade restrictive than necessary to address Singapore’s public policy objectives arising out of its specific constraints of space.

Article 29.5: Tobacco Control Measures[12]

A Party may elect to deny the benefits of Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) with respect to claims challenging a tobacco control measure[13] of the Party. Such a claim shall not be submitted to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment) if a Party has made such an election. If a Party has not elected to deny benefits with respect to such claims by the time of the submission of such a claim to arbitration under Section B of Chapter 9 (Investment), a Party may elect to deny benefits during the proceedings. For greater certainty, if a Party elects to deny benefits with respect to such claims, any such claim shall be dismissed.

Article 29.6: Treaty of Waitangi

1. Provided that such measures are not used as a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination against persons of the other Parties or as a disguised restriction on trade in goods, trade in services and investment, nothing in this Agreement shall preclude the adoption by New Zealand of measures it deems necessary to accord more favourable treatment to Maori in respect of matters covered by this Agreement, including in fulfilment of its obligations under the Treaty of Waitangi.

2. The Parties agree that the interpretation of the Treaty of Waitangi, including as to the nature of the rights and obligations arising under it, shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions of this Agreement. Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) shall otherwise apply to this Article. A panel established under Article 28.7 (Establishment of a Panel) may be requested to determine only whether any measure referred to in paragraph 1 is inconsistent with a Party’s rights under this Agreement.

Section B: General Provisions

Article 29.7: Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or allow access to information, the disclosure of which would be contrary to its law or would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

Article 29.8: Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cultural Expressions and Genetic Resources

Subject to each Party’s international obligations, each Party may establish appropriate measures to respect, preserve and promote traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions.

[1] For the purposes of Chapter 17 (State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), Article XX of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, only with respect to measures of a Party (including the implementation of measures through the activities of a state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly) affecting the purchase, production or sale of goods, or affecting activities the end result of which is the production of goods.

[2] This paragraph is without prejudice to whether a digital product should be classified as a good or service.

[3] For the purposes of Chapter 17 (State-Owned Enterprises and Designated Monopolies), Article XIV of GATS (including its footnotes) is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, only with respect to measures of a Party (including the implementation of measures through the activities of a state-owned enterprise or designated monopoly) affecting the purchase or supply of services, or affecting activities the end result of which is the supply of services.

[4] Without prejudice to the general interpretation of Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.3 (National Treatment), and Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), the fact that a measure adopted or maintained pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 differentiates between investors on the basis of residency does not necessarily mean that the measure is inconsistent with Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 11.3 (National Treatment) and Article and Article 11.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment).

[5] For greater certainty, measures referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 may be non-discriminatory regulatory actions by a Party that are designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives as referred to in Annex 9-B(3)(b) (Expropriation).

[6] The term “restricted assets” in this subparagraph refers only to assets invested in the territory of the restricting Party by an investor of a Party that are restricted from being transferred out of the territory of the restricting Party.

[7] For the purposes of this Article, “foreign direct investment” means a type of investment by an investor of a Party in the territory of another Party, through which the investor exercises ownership or control over, or a significant degree of influence on the management of, an enterprise or other direct investment, and tends to be undertaken in order to establish a lasting relationship. For example, ownership of at least 10 per cent of the voting power of an enterprise over a period of at least 12 months generally would be considered foreign direct investment.

[8] For the purposes of consultations between the designated authorities of the relevant Parties, the contact point of Japan is the Ministry of Finance.

[9] This is without prejudice to the methodology used to determine the value of such investment or property under Parties’ respective laws.

[10] This is without prejudice to the methodology used to determine the value of such investment or property under Parties’ respective laws.

[11] The Parties understand that this subparagraph must be interpreted by reference to the footnote to Article XIV(d) of GATS as if the Article was not restricted to services or direct taxes.

[12] For greater certainty, this Article does not prejudice: (i) the operation of Article 9.14 (Denial of Benefits); or (ii) a Party’s rights under Chapter 28 (Dispute Settlement) in relation to a tobacco control measure.

[13] A tobacco control measure means a measure of a Party related to the production or consumption of manufactured tobacco products (including products made or derived from tobacco), their distribution, labeling, packaging, advertising, marketing, promotion, sale, purchase, or use, as well as enforcement measures, such as inspection, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements. For greater certainty, a measure with respect to tobacco leaf that is not in the possession of a manufacturer of tobacco products or that is not part of a manufactured tobacco product is not a tobacco control measure.


*************** Chapter 30 ***************

--- Final Provisions ---

url: (https://medium.com/@USTradeRep/29a2af5df02f)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) levels the playing field for American workers and American businesses, leading to more Made-in-America exports and more higher-paying American jobs here at home. By cutting over 18,000 taxes different countries put on Made-in-America products, TPP makes sure our farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, service suppliers, and small businesses can compete — and win — in some of the fastest growing markets in the world. With more than 95 percent of the world’s consumers living outside our borders, TPP will significantly expand the export of Made-in-America goods and services and support American jobs.

The Final Provisions chapter defines the way the Agreement will enter into force and the ways in which it can be amended; provides rules on the ways other economies can join the TPP Agreement in the future and how Parties can withdraw should they choose to do so; and specifies the official languages of publication.

Overview

Amendments

The Final Provisions chapter ensures that the TPP Agreement can be amended, after each Party follows its appropriate domestic procedures. No amendments will apply to the United States without U.S. agreement based on our domestic procedures, including Congressional consultation and approval.

Accessions

The United States is interested in seeing TPP membership grow over time so that it can serve as a platform for economic integration across the Asia-Pacific region. Therefore, the Final Provisions chapter includes provisions specifying the Agreement is open to accession by members of the Asia Pacific Economic Forum (APEC) and other economies as agreed by the Parties. New entrants would need to be willing and able to meet TPP’s high standards, and the terms of accession for new entrants will have to be agreed by all pre-existing Parties. For the United States, applicable domestic procedures would be needed to add new members to the TPP. This would include Congressional notification before entering into negotiations with a potential new entrant, Congressional notification of intent to sign, consultation with Congress throughout the process, and final Congressional approval.

Entry into Force

The TPP will enter into force with each partner only when the United States is satisfied that the other Party has taken the steps necessary for the proper implementation of the TPP Agreement. Other Parties may similarly seek to confirm the proper implementation of the TPP Agreement by each Party.

Housekeeping Provisions

The Final Provisions chapter specifies the procedures under which a Party can withdraw from the TPP Agreement, designates a depositary (responsible for receiving and disseminating documents), and sets out that the English, Spanish, and French versions of the Agreement are equally authentic.

New Features

The TPP Agreement contains provisions that provide clearly defined accession procedures, with the support of all TPP Parties. However, new Parties will only be able to accede to the Agreement if they are willing and able to meet TPP’s high standards, and applicable domestic procedures — including approval by Congress in the case of the U.S. — are followed.

Article 30.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices, and footnotes to this Agreement shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 30.2: Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. When so agreed by all Parties and approved in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each Party, an amendment shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which all Parties have notified the Depositary in writing of the approval of the amendment in accordance with their respective applicable legal procedures, or on such other date as the Parties may agree.

Article 30.3: Amendment of the WTO Agreement

In the event of an amendment of the WTO Agreement that amends a provision that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement, the Parties shall, unless this Agreement provides otherwise, consult on whether to amend this Agreement.

Article 30.4: Accession

1. This Agreement is open to accession by:

(a) any State or separate customs territory that is a member of APEC, and

(b) such other State or separate customs territory as the Parties may agree,

that is prepared to comply with the obligations set out in the Agreement, subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed between the State or customs territory and the Parties, and following approval in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each Party and acceding State or customs territory.

2. A State or separate customs territory may seek to accede to this Agreement by submitting a request in writing to the Depositary.

3. (a) Following receipt of a request under paragraph 2 to accede, the Commission shall, provided in the case of paragraph 1(b) that the Parties so agree, establish a working group to negotiate the terms and conditions for the accession. Membership in the working group shall be open to all interested Parties.

(b) After completing its work, the working group shall provide a written report to the Commission. If the working group has reached agreement with the accession candidate on proposed terms and conditions for accession, the report shall set out those terms and conditions, a recommendation to the Commission to approve them, and a proposed Commission decision inviting the accession candidate to become a Party to the Agreement.

3bis. For purposes of paragraph 3:

(a) A decision of the Commission shall be deemed to be taken only where:

(i) all Parties have indicated agreement to the establishment of a working group to consider the request for accession, or

(ii) if a Party does not indicate agreement when the Commission considers the issue, that Party has not objected in writing to the establishment of a working group to consider the request for accession within 7 days of the Commission’s consideration.

(b) A decision of the working group shall be deemed to be taken only where:

(i) all Parties that are members of the working group have indicated agreement, or

(ii) if a Party that is a member of the working group does not indicate agreement when the working group considers an issue, that Party has not objected in writing within 7 days of the working group’s consideration.

4. If the Commission adopts a decision approving the terms and conditions for an accession and inviting an accession candidate to become a Party, the Commission shall specify a period, which may be subject to extension by agreement of the Parties, during which the accession candidate may deposit an instrument of accession indicating that it accepts those terms and conditions.

5. An accession candidate shall become a Party to this Agreement, subject to the terms and conditions approved in the Commission’s decision, on the later of:

(a) 60 days after the date on which the candidate deposits an instrument of accession with the Depositary indicating that it accepts those terms and conditions; or

(b) the date on which all Parties have notified the Depositary that they have completed their respective applicable legal procedures.

Article 30.5: Entry into Force

1. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which all original signatories have notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of their applicable legal procedures.

2. In the event that not all original signatories have notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of their applicable legal procedures within a period of two years of the date of the signature of this Agreement, it shall enter into force 60 days after the expiry of this period if at least six of the original signatories, which together account for at least 85 per cent of the combined gross domestic product of the original signatories in 2013,[1] have notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of their applicable legal procedures within this period.

3. In the event that this Agreement does not enter into force under paragraph 1 or 2, it shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which at least six of the original signatories, which together account for at least 85 per cent of the combined gross domestic product of the original signatories in 2013, have notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of their applicable legal procedures.

4. After the date of entry into force of this Agreement under paragraph 2 or 3, an original signatory for which the Agreement has not entered into force shall notify the Parties of the completion of its applicable legal procedures and its intention to become a Party to this Agreement. The Commission shall determine within 30 days of the date of the notification by that original signatory whether the Agreement shall enter into force with respect to the notifying original signatory.

5. Unless the Commission and the notifying original signatory agree otherwise, this Agreement shall enter into force for that notifying original signatory referred to in paragraph 4, 30 days after the date on which the Commission makes an affirmative determination.

Article 30.6: Withdrawal

1. Any Party may withdraw from this Agreement by providing written notice of withdrawal to the Depositary. A withdrawing Party shall simultaneously notify the other Parties of its withdrawal through the contact points.

2. A withdrawal shall take effect six months after a Party provides written notice to the Depositary under paragraph 1, unless the Parties agree on a different period. If a Party withdraws, this Agreement shall remain in force for the remaining Parties.

Article 30.7: Depositary

1. The original English, Spanish, and French texts of this Agreement shall be deposited with New Zealand, which is hereby designated as the Depositary of this Agreement.

2. The Depositary shall promptly provide certified copies of the original texts of this Agreement and of any amendments to this Agreement to each signatory State, acceding State and acceding separate customs territory.

3. The Depositary shall promptly inform each signatory and acceding State or separate customs territory, and provide them with the date and a copy, of:

(a) a notification under Article 30.2 (Amendments), Article 30.4.5 (Accession) or Article 30.5 (Entry into Force);

(b) a request to accede to this Agreement under Article 30.4.2 (Accession);

(c) the deposit of an instrument of accession under Article 30.4.4 (Accession); and

(d) a notice of withdrawal provided under Article 30.6 (Withdrawal).

Article 30.8: Authentic Texts

The English, Spanish, and French texts of this Agreement are equally authentic. In the event of any divergence between those texts, the English text shall prevail.

[1] For the purposes of this Article, gross domestic products shall be based on data of the International Monetary Fund using current prices (U.S. dollars).


------------------------------

######################################
### scrape by jontonsoup4          ###
### email: jontonsoup4@gmail.com   ###
######################################